PROJECT FINANCE  
COURSE OUTLINE 
 
Term: Spring 2009 (1st half-semester) 
Instructor: Adjunct Prof. Donald B. Reid 
Time: Office: KMEC 9-95, 212-759-5655 
Classroom: Email: dreid@stern.nyu.edu 
Admin aide: Contact: dreid@stern.nyu.edu 
 
Background 
 
Project finance is used on a global basis to finance over $300 billion of capital-
intensive projects annually in industries such as power, transportation, energy, 
chemicals, and mining.  This increasingly critical, financial technique relies on non-
recourse, risk-mitigated cash flows of a specific project, not the balance sheet or 
corporate guarantee of a sponsor, to support the funding, using a broad-based set 
of inter-disciplinary skills  
 
Not all projects can support project financing. Project finance is a specialized 
financial tool necessitating an in-depth understanding of markets, technology, 
sponsors, offtakers, contracts, operators, and financial structuring.  It is important 
to understand the key elements that support a project financing and how an 
investor or lender can get comfortable with making a loan or investment.  Several 
industries will be used to demonstrate project-financing principles, with emphasis 
on one of the most important, power. 
 
Objective of the Course 
 
The purpose of the course is to understand what project finance is, its necessary 
elements, why it is used, how it is used, its advantages and its disadvantages.   At 
the end of the course, students should be able to identify projects that meet the 
essential criteria for a project financing and know how to create the structure for a 
basic project financing.   
 
The course will study the necessary elements critical to project financing to include 
product markets, technology, sponsors, operators, offtakers, environment, 
consultants, taxes and financial sources.  We will discuss and apply the 
fundamental risk allocation principle of assigning risks and tasks to the party most 
capable of handling them.  Various sources of financing will be discussed including 
commercial banks, equity sources, the bond markets and leasing.   
 
Financial modeling will be used as an important tool in understanding the 
economics, risks and sensitivities of a project.  Several guest speakers from the 
real world will be invited to discuss topics such as current market conditions, 
contracts, hedging, the role of consultants and other pertinent issues.    
 
Preparation and Conduct of the Classes 
 
The student’s primary obligation in this course is to prepare for class discussion 
based on a thorough reading and analysis of assigned materials and preparation of 
cases in a team setting.    
 
Students will be assigned to 3-person teams to work together on 3-4 cases in this 
six-session course.   The teams will be diverse, reflecting the nature of our global 
business environment.  Each team will have at least one “modeling ace.”  The 
fundamental belief in doing cases is that one learns best by doing versus reading 
and memorization. 
 
Class participation and discussions are important learning tools.  Class 
participation will be graded.   
 
Individual students may make presentations with the approval of the instructor on 
real world topics of interest such as an actual project financing.  Such 
presentations will receive extra credit and need to be discussed with the instructor. 
 
Class topics to be covered will include:   
 
Project Structure and Participants:  Debt, equity, developers, consultants, 
offtakers, sponsors, operators, law firms, consultants, construction and 
engineering firms, political and regulatory bodies  
 
Project Risks and Mitigants:  Markets, currency, construction, technology, 
offtakers, input supplies, operations, sponsors, political, environmental and 
regulatory 
 
Sources of Financing:  Banks, insurance companies/pension funds, public 
markets, equity funds, leasing, sponsors, financial equity, strategic equity 
 
Credit Agreements: pricing, terms, conditions, covenants, representations 
and warranties, events of default. 
 
Financial Modeling:  The role and importance of project modeling to identify, 
test and measure risks (this will be done through class discussion, study 
examples and use in the cases). 
 
 
Quizzes:  There will be 2-3 quizzes taken as Blackboard Assignments. 
 
 
Grading:  The weights for the student’s overall grade are: 
 
Class participation   
10%  
3 Homework Quizzes  
10% each 
Cases  
 
 
60% 
 
Textbook:  One or two books are required, and will be available in the bookstore.  
All other readings and all cases will be distributed in a course-pack at the start of 
the course or during the classes. 
 
COURSE OUTLINE 
SESSION #1  
 
Introduction – Project Finance Overview and Fundamentals 
Read: TBD 
Topics Covered 
 
1. What is “project finance?” 
2. How widely is it used 
3. Parties to a Project Financing 
4. What are the advantages and disadvantages of Project Finance 
5. What are the necessary perquisites to a Project Financing 
6. Project Financing Risks and Structuring Part I 
7. What is role of the financial modeling and projections 
8. Readings and Case Assignment 
 
 
SESSION #2: Project Finance Structure and Participants 
Read: TBD 
Topics Covered 
 
1. Case Discussion and Presentations 
2. Project Financing Risks and Structuring Part II 
3. Guest Speaker / Special Topic 
4. Readings and Case Assignment 
 
SESSION #3: Project Finance Risks and Mitigants 
Read: TBD 
Topics Covered 
 
1. Case Discussion and Presentations 
2. Project Financing Risks and Structuring Part III 
3. Guest Speaker / Special Topic 
4. Readings and Case Assignment 
 
SESSION #4: Sources of Capital   
Read: TBD 
Topics Covered 
 
1. Case Discussion and Presentations 
2. Project Financing Risks and Structuring Part IV 
3. Various sources of debt and equity 
4. Guest Speaker / Special Topic  
5. Readings and Case Assignment 
 
 
SESSION #5: The Loan Agreement (possible guest speaker) 
Read:  TBD 
Study questions: 
Topics Covered 
 
1. Case Discussion and Presentations 
2. Project Financing Risks and Structuring Part V 
3. Guest Speaker / Special Topic  
4. Readings and Case Assignment 
 
SESSION #6: Final Case and Wrap-up   
Read:  TBD 
 
1. Final Case Discussion and Presentations 
2. Guest Speaker / Special Topic 
3. Wrap-up 
 
Case Format  
 
A.  State your recommendation:  To lend, Yes or No 
B.  Conduct Analysis  
 
1. Summarize the transaction and parties involved.  If appropriate, 
draw a box diagram showing the relationships and direction of 
cash flows 
2. Identify and evaluate the key participants 
3. Evaluate any environmental, regulatory and political issues 
4. Identify and evaluate the key strengths of the project 
5. Identify and evaluate the key weaknesses, risks and mitigants of 
the project 
6. Develop a financial model.  Run scenarios.  Test the key 
economic drivers 
7. Describe any other relevant issues or matters pertinent to the 
credit/investment decision 
 
C.  Summarize and explain the reasons for your recommendation  
 
D.  Exhibits 
 
 
 
 
