 
  
BUAD 306 Course Syllabus  
1 
 
BUAD 306 – Business Finance 
Syllabus – Spring 2017 
Section 14780 T-Th 2-3:50pm JKP 110 
Section 14781 T-Th 4-5:50pm JKP 110 
 
Professor:  Julia Plotts      
Office: Hoffman Hall (HOH) 221          
Office Hours: T-Th 12:30pm-1:30pm 
It is best to e-mail in advance if you plan to attend office hours 
E-mail: plotts@marshall.usc.edu 
 
T.A.: Russell Yue - See Blackboard for office hours schedule 
E-mail: russelly@usc.edu 
 
Course Description 
BUAD 306 is a fundamentals course in business finance. Finance is a way of thinking about eco-
nomic problems that involve uncertainty over time. This course is designed to provide an introduc-
tory framework for understanding how financiers think, how they break down components of a 
financial problem, and how they make decisions as investors and corporations in the financial mar-
ket. By the end of the semester, you should be familiar with financial vocabulary, understand as-
pects of financial theory, develop skills in financial computation, and appreciate the underlying 
financial mindset as well as incentives involved when solving problems of finance. You will learn 
how to determine risk, how to make financial decisions, and how to value an investment as a poten-
tial financial opportunity. 
 
Learning Objectives  
Through lecture, case analysis, worked samples, and by learning to apply appropriate mathematical 
and financial formulas and functions, you will be able to: 
 
1. Understand basic types, goals, and implications of financial management and the role of the 
financial decision-maker. 
2. Interpret financial statements and how they influence long-term planning and growth. 
3. Understand the meaning of time value of money and how to evaluate the tradeoff between dol-
lars today and dollars sometime in the future. 
4. Understand how firms decide to commit capital and its impact on cash flow (discounted cash 
flow). 
5. Understand interest rates and bonds and realize how interest rates impact bonds. 
6. Understand the different criteria used to evaluate proposed investments (e.g., net present value 
(NPV), profitability index, payback period). 
7. Determine the cost of capital, and understand and apply the concepts of the weighted cost of 
capital (WACC). 
8. Recognize and understand the elements of optimal capital structure, the effects of financial lev-
erage, bankruptcy, and the role of taxes. 
9. Understand the dynamics of behavioral finance and its influence on individual and corporate 
financial decision-making (e.g., the impact of heuristics). 
10. Understand derivatives, or options, in the context of corporate finance. 
 
Required Materials 
 
1) Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, Eleventh Edition by Ross, Westerfield and 
Jordan. ISBN 9781259698712 E‐book from the publisher for $125 available here: 
http://connect.mheducation.com/class/j-plotts-library-course_2 
 
 
  
BUAD 306 Course Syllabus  
2 
2) Harvard Business Publishing: Hansson Private Label, Inc.: Evaluating an Investment in Expan-
sion. The case can be purchased here: http://cb.hbsp.harvard.edu/cbmp/access/58015921  
 
3) Calculator with financial functions. The TA will have calculator tutorials using the HP 10bII+. 
Other calculators are similar, such as the Texas Instruments BA II, the Hewlett Packard 17bII+, 
Hewlett Packard 12C, and Hewlett Packard 10bII, and the Texas Instruments BA II Plus Profes-
sional. Many graphical calculators, such as the TI‐83, have built‐in financial functions. However, it 
is the student’s responsibility to learn the functions of their particular calculators. You should bring 
your calculator to all classes and exams. You will be extremely disadvantaged if you do not have 
your calculator during exams. During exams you will not be allowed to use cellphone calculators, 
computers, or any other device that can communicate to other devices, so learning how to use the 
financial calculator is essential for success in the class. 
 
Prerequisites and/or Recommended Preparation:    
ACCT 410 or BUAD 280 or BUAD 285a or BUAD 286b or BUAD 305 and ECON 351. 
 
Course Notes:   
Copies of lecture slides and other class information are available through your Blackboard account. 
 
Grading Policies: 
 
Assignments  
% of Grade 
 
 
TESTS                          MIDTERM (3/2)              
30% 
                                      FINAL EXAM (5/4)                    
30% 
                                        
  
HOMEWORK (due 1/26, 2/16, 3/30, 4/20) 
QUIZZES (2/9, 4/6) 
  10% 
  10% 
CLASS PARTICIPATION 
 
  5% 
 
 
GROUP CASE ANALYSIS (2/23) 
 15% 
 
 
                                                                                   TOTAL 
     100.0% 
 
Final grades represent how you perform in the class relative to other students.  Your grade 
will not be based on a mandated target, but on your performance. Historically, the average 
grade for this class is about a B.  Three items are considered when assigning final grades: 
1. Your average weighted score as a percentage of the available points for all assignments 
(the points you receive divided by the number of points possible). 
2. The overall average percentage score within the class.  
3. Your ranking among all students in the class. 
 
Grading Detail:  
Exams All exams are closed book, closed notes. Financial calculators are allowed and recommend-
ed, but E-devices (mobile phones, PDAs, I-Phones, other texting devices, laptops, iPads, etc.) are 
not allowed. All exams will use the Scantron multiple choice format. Students must provide their 
own pencils. Students must take the exam in the lecture section in which they are registered. 
 
Exam Absence Policy Students are required to be present for all exams. If you are not able to take 
the exams on the dates and times specified in the detailed schedule, you should not take this class.  
 
Assignments Assignments must be turned in prior to the start of class on the date listed in the 
schedule below. Assignments must be submitted electronically via Blackboard. Any assignment 
 
  
BUAD 306 Course Syllabus  
3 
turned in late, even by a few minutes, will receive no credit. Assignments will be given a grade of 
“credit” or “no credit.” Assignment will be assigned a “credit” if and only if the assignment is rea-
sonably complete and correct. Working in groups is encouraged, but each group member must turn 
in his/her own write-up. Identical or near identical answers will result in no-credit for all parties.  
 
Class Participation 
Please arrive to class on time and prepared. Be prepared for cold calling, bring your name card to 
class. Please come to class rested (if you sleep in class you will be asked to leave). 
 
High Score: 
• 
Regular attendance and active and consistent participation in the class sessions with in-
sightful questions and comments. 
• 
Consistently very high levels of preparation for class sessions and activities. 
• 
Superior and sophisticated understanding, insights, and syntheses of the course material as 
reflected in group assignments and case analysis and class discussions. 
• 
Proactive and very high levels of involvement in the group case assignment. 
• 
Very high levels of professionalism manifested in interactions with speakers and class-
mates. 
 
Add/Drop Process  
This class will remain open enrollment (R-clearance) through the add deadline. If there is an open 
seat, students can add the class using Web Registration.  If the class is full, students will need to 
continue checking the Schedule of Classes (classes.usc.edu) to see if a space becomes available. 
Students who do not attend class the first two weeks may be dropped from the course if they do not 
notify the instructor prior to their absence. It is the responsibility of a late add student to get caught 
up on any missed classes or work. There are no special accommodations for late adds. 
 
Technology Policy 
Laptop and Internet usage is not permitted during academic or professional sessions unless other-
wise stated by the respective professor and/or staff.  Use of other personal communication devices, 
such as cell phones, is considered unprofessional and is not permitted during academic or profes-
sional sessions. ANY e-devices (cell phones, iPads, other texting devices, laptops, I-pods) must be 
completely turned off during class time. Upon request, you must comply and put your device on 
the table in off mode and FACE DOWN. You might also be asked to deposit your devices in a des-
ignated area in the classroom. Videotaping faculty lectures is not permitted due to copyright in-
fringement regulations. Audiotaping may be permitted if approved by the professor. Use of any 
recorded or distributed material is reserved exclusively for the USC students registered in this 
class. 
 
Teaching Assistants and Tutoring 
The teaching assistant contact information and office hours can be found on Blackboard. The TAs 
will hold regular office hours and can answer questions on the material during office hours or via 
email. 
 
Tutoring is offered through the Marshall Office of Undergraduate Advising as a supplement to 
classroom instruction. Tutors are available to assist students in understanding difficult concepts, 
but tutoring sessions are only effective if students regularly attend class and actively engage in the 
process or thinking critically about the course content. For more information on tutoring, visit the 
Marshall Office of Undergraduate Advising in JFF 201 (213) 740-0690 or 
http://students.marshall.usc.edu/undergrad/marshall-peer-tutoring-program/tutoring-schedule/  
 
 
 
 
  
BUAD 306 Course Syllabus  
4 
Academic Integrity and Conduct  
USC seeks to maintain an optimal learning environment. General principles of academic honesty 
include  the concept of respect for the intellectual property of others, the expectation that individual 
work will be submitted unless otherwise allowed by an instructor, and the obligations both to pro-
tect one’s own academic work from misuse by others as well as to avoid using another’s work as 
one’s own (plagiarism). Plagiarism – presenting someone else’s ideas as your own, either verbatim 
or recast in your own words – is a serious academic offense with serious consequences.  All stu-
dents are expected to understand and abide by the principles discussed in the SCampus, the Student 
Guidebook (www.usc.edu/scampus or http://scampus.usc.edu). A discussion of plagiarism appears 
in the University Student Conduct Code (section 11.00 and Appendix A).  
 
Students will be referred to the Office of Student Judicial Affairs and Community Standards for 
further review, should there be any suspicion of academic dishonesty. The Review process can be 
found at: http://www.usc.edu/student-affairs/SJACS/ . Failure to adhere to the academic conduct 
standards set forth by these guidelines and our programs will not be tolerated by the USC Marshall 
community and can lead to dismissal. 
 
Discrimination, sexual assault, and harassment are not tolerated by the university.  You are en-
couraged to report any incidents to the Office of Equity and Diversity http://equity.usc.edu/ or to 
the Department of Public Safety http://dps.usc.edu/contact/report/.  This is important for the safety 
of the whole USC community.  Another member of the university community – such as a friend, 
classmate, advisor, or faculty member – can help initiate the report or can initiate the report on 
behalf of another person.  Relationship and Sexual Violence Prevention and Services (RSVP) 
https://engemannshc.usc.edu/rsvp/ provides 24/7 confidential support, and the sexual assault re-
source center webpage https://sarc.usc.edu/reporting-options/ describes reporting options and other 
resources. 
 
Support Systems 
Students whose primary language is not English should check with the American Language Insti-
tute http://dornsife.usc.edu/ali, which sponsors courses and workshops specifically for international 
graduate students.  The Office of Disability Services and Programs (www.usc.edu/disability) pro-
vides certification for students with disabilities and helps arrange the relevant accommodations.  If 
an officially declared emergency makes travel to campus infeasible, USC Emergency Information 
(http://emergency.usc.edu/) will provide safety and other updates, including ways in which instruc-
tion will be continued by means of blackboard, teleconferencing, and other technology. 
 
Students with Disabilities 
The Office of Disability Services and Programs (www.usc.edu/disability) provides certification for 
students with disabilities and helps arrange the relevant accommodations.  Any student requesting 
academic accommodations based on a disability is required to register with Disability Services and 
Programs (DSP) each semester. A letter of verification for approved accommodations can be ob-
tained from DSP. Please be sure the letter is delivered to me (or to your TA) as early in the semes-
ter as possible. DSP is located in GFS (Grace Ford Salvatori Hall) 120 and is open 8:30 a.m.–5:00 
p.m., Monday through Friday. DSP contact info: (213) 740-0776 e-mail: ability@usc.edu. 
 
Emergency Preparedness/Course Continuity   
In case of a declared emergency if travel to campus is not feasible, the USC Emergency Infor-
mation web site (http://emergency.usc.edu/) will provide safety and other information, including 
electronic means by which instructors will conduct class using a combination of Blackboard, tele-
conferencing, and other technologies. 
 
 
 
 
  
BUAD 306 Course Syllabus  
5 
COURSE CALENDAR/READINGS/CLASS SESSIONS 
 
*M-W Classes observe both MLK Birthday and President’s Day. 
 
 
 
 
Topics/Daily Activities 
Chapters 
Deliverables 
1/10 
 
1/12 
Introduction to Corporate Finance 
Goal of Financial Management 
Financial Statements 
Balance Sheet, Income Statement, Cash Flow 
1 
 
2-3 
 
1/17 
 
1/19 
Financial Statements 
Cash flow, ratio analysis, telling a story with #s 
Long Term Financial Planning and Growth 
External financing, internal and sustainable growth 
2-3 
 
4 
 
1/24 
 
1/26 
Time Value of Money 
Present value, future value 
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation 
Net present value, annuities, perpetuities 
5 
 
6 
 
 
Homework #1 
1/31 
2/2 
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation 
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation 
Valuation of debt, yield curve, bond ratings, covenants 
6 
7 
 
 
2/7 
2/9 
Bond Valuation continued, Stock Valuation 
Stock Valuation 
Dividend growth model 
7-8 
8 
 
Quiz #1 
2/14 
 
2/16 
NPV and Other Investment Criteria 
NPV, IRR, payback, capital budgeting criteria 
Making Capital Investment Decisions 
9 
 
10 
 
 
Homework #2 
2/21 
2/23 
Special Topic 
Hansson Private Label Case Discussion 
 
 
Group Case  
2/28 
3/2 
Review 
Midterm Exam 
 
 
 
3/7 
 
3/9 
Lessons from Capital Market History 
Returns through time for different asset classes 
No Class Scheduled* 
12 
 
 
3/14-3/16 
Spring Break – No Class Scheduled 
 
 
3/21 
 
 
3/23 
Return, Risk and Security Market Line 
E(r) for assets and portfolios, diversification, efficient frontier 
Capital Asset Pricing Model 
Quantifying risk, systematic risk, beta and the market risk premium 
13 
 
 
13 
 
 
3/28 
3/30 
Cost of Capital 
Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) 
14 
14 
 
Homework #3 
4/4 
4/6 
No Class Scheduled* 
Raising Capital 
 
15 
 
Quiz #2 
4/11 
 
4/13 
Financial Leverage and Capital Structure Policy 
Effect of financial leverage 
Mergers and Acquisitions 
16 
 
26 
 
4/18 
4/20 
Mergers and Acquisitions 
Options and Corporate Finance 
26 
24-25 
 
Homework #4 
4/25 
4/27 
Review 
Course Wrap-Up 
 
 
5/4 
5/4 
Final Exam Section 14780 2-4pm 
Final Exam Section 14781 4:30-6:30pm 
 
 
 
  
BUAD 306 Course Syllabus  
6 
Hansson Private Label Group Case Due 2/23/17 
 
Harvard Business Publishing: Hansson Private Label, Inc.: Evaluating an Investment in Expansion 
The case can be purchased here: http://cb.hbsp.harvard.edu/cbmp/access/58015921  
 
Submission Process: 
Your group case analysis will be turned in as a written deliverable. Please work on your cases in 
groups of 3-6 people. Seeking assistance or “hints” from the instructor, the T.A. or past students is not 
authorized. A written case analysis should consist of a written (executive summary) using a standard 
font and font size (such as Times New Roman size 11-12), addressing the case questions with support-
ing computations and tables in a separate appendix. Put your group members’ names on Page 1 of the 
document. Submit the entire document including any exhibits with excel calculations in a PDF docu-
ment. Submit your files on Blackboard by the start time of class of the due date. Please format your 
deliverable as a PDF with excel exhibits in the appendix. 
 
Prior to working on the group case it is advisable to review the textbook and also the Capital Budget-
ing supplement and slides provided to you including the excel spreadsheet with the Project Greenlight 
example. The group case assignment grade is based on the quality of your analysis, how well you 
support your assumptions and apply corporate finance and valuation techniques, and the judgment you 
exercise and on the professionalism of your presentations. The quality of work product should be re-
flective of what you would be comfortable presenting to an employer. Case grades will be determined 
relative to the analyses of other groups in the class. Groups may be randomly selected to verbally pre-
sent their findings on the case analysis during the class session. 
 
Hansson Case Questions 
• 
Evaluate HPL’s historical financial performance. How has HPL performed? Consider his-
torical analysis of financial performance ratios and peer comparison. 
• 
Utilizing the data provided, determine whether the expansion project is attractive in strate-
gic and economic terms. Calculate the total project cash flows, NPV, IRR, and payback pe-
riod given the supplied project forecasts. Perform a basic sensitivity analysis on key varia-
bles and drivers of the NPV analysis. 
• 
Will the expansion position HPL for any form of sustainable competitive advantage? Will 
it allow HPL to improve long-term profitability? If HPL wants to decline the proposal, 
what practical alternatives does he have? 
• 
What are the risks of the investment?  What might be done to mitigate these risks?  
 
The following is taken from page 3 of the case. 
 
 
 
  
BUAD 306 Course Syllabus  
7 
 
Calculation Hints: 
Your group must set up a financial analysis of the project. Refer to the discussion of the Investment 
Proposal and exhibit 5 and also to your textbook chapters on Capital Budgeting. Refer to the Hansson 
spreadsheets provided. 
 
The Year 0 Initial Investment will be $45,000 (Facility Expansion, Manufacturing Equipment, and 
Packaging Equipment.  Assumptions have been provided for depreciation and maintenance expenses.   
 
For purposes of calculating the 10-year project free cash flow (2009-2018) I have provided my 2009 
(first year) calculation. There is a discrepancy in the case writers’ Manufacturing Overhead in 2009. 
In the case is $3600, but the HBS excel file shows $3920. If we use $3920 it gets us to the case writers' 
NWC number, $12,817.  
 
Operating Results: 
2009  
Revenue 
84,960  
Less:  Raw Material 
Costs 
45,120  
Less:  Labor Ex-
pense 
18,640  
Less:  Manufacturing Overhead 
3,920  
Less:  Maintenance Expense 
2,250  
Less:  Selling, General & Administra-
tive Expense 
6,594  
EBITDA 
8,436  
Less:  Depreciation 
4,000  
EBIT 
4,436  
Less:  Taxes 
1,774  
NOPAT 
2,662  
Un-Levered Free Cash Flow: 
NOPAT 
2,662  
Plus:  Depreciation 
4,000  
Less:  Change in Working 
Capital 
12,817  
Un-Levered Free Cash Flow 
(6,156) 
 
Note: Your textbook defines Inventory Turnover = Cost of Goods Sold / Inventory 
Days’ Sales in Inventory = 365 / Inventory Turnover. In the Hansson case refer to the definition of 
DSO, DPO and DSI that is being used in the case: 
 
 
 
Projecting the working capital accounts is simply a matter of algebraic manipulation. For example, 
if the assumption for DSO is 47.6x, then to project the amount of accounts receivable needed for 
the first year in the project (2009) it would be: 
 
DSO= Ending Receivables/(Sales/360 days) 
A/R=(DSO/360) x Sales 
11,223=(47.6/360) x 84,960 
 
 
  
BUAD 306 Course Syllabus  
8 
DSI= Ending Inventory/(Sales/360 days) 
Inventory= (DSI/360) x Sales 
8,865=(37.562/360) x 84,960 
 
DPO=(Ending Accounts Payable/Cash Operating Expenses/360) 
Accounts Payable= (DPO/360) x Cash Operating Expenses* 
7,270=(34.2/360) x 76,524 
 
*Cash Operating Expenses includes Raw Material Costs, Labor Expense, Manufacturing Overhead, 
Maintenance Expense, Selling, General & Administrative Expense. 
 
The increase in working capital is not expected to occur up front at the time of the initial invest-
ment. It is assumed to take place throughout the first year and should be considered as part of the 
2009 cash flows.  You will notice that going from working capital of 0 in year 0 to 12.8 million in 
year 1, the first year of Un-Levered Free Cash Flow for the project will subtract a “use” of cash of 
12.8 million. As a reminder, Net Working Capital is calculated by taking current assets (Accounts 
Receivable and Inventory) less current liabilities (Accounts Payable).  The Change in Working 
Capital is from one period to the next and shows the cash flow impact. 
 
In each subsequent year 2010-2018 the amount subtracted will be much less since working capital 
will have already been established in the first year and you will just evaluate the change (increase) 
in net working capital. As a reminder, according to the footnote in the case on page 3, at least some 
portion of net working capital will be returned to investors at the end of the project in 2018. The 
return of working capital is equal to the balance of accounts receivable less accounts payable (at 
the end of 2018).  According to the case assumptions, inventory is assumed to be worthless. Be-
cause the property, plant, and equipment is specialized and almost completely depreciated, it is as-
sumed to be worthless. You will need to discount the return of the net working capital back to pre-
sent along with the project cash flows.  
 
 
 
 
Since we have not yet discussed the Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) or the appropriate 
assumption for a discount rate, please assume 9.38% for your discount rate “r” for the NPV analy-
sis (this was the cost of capital calculated in exhibit 7 for a 20% Debt/Value assumption).  Exhibit 
7 includes some terminology and calculations that will be revisited in the discussion about capital 
structure, debt, etc. 
 
The purpose of the case analysis is for groups to perform analysis of a real world capital budgeting 
case. Many of the examples in the textbook are simplified and may not be as relevant to you in a 
practical setting. When we have our class discussion I hope we can encourage debate as to what 
Hansson should do and what makes strategic sense – whether he should accept or decline the pro-
ject – and your reasoning for this decision. This should include a discussion of the risks of accept-
ing the project and other potential options and/or opportunities. 
 
 
