Faculty of 
Social Science 
Fall/Winter 2022/23 Course Syllabus 
MOS 2310B Sections – 001, 002, & 003 
Finance 
Course Mode: In-Person 
Instructor: Nicholas Kahnert 
Office: SSC 4424 
Office Hours: Thursdays, 10am-2pm, or by appointment (may be conducted via Zoom) 
Email: ntkahner@uwo.ca 
1. Course Information:
1.1 
Class Location and Time: 
Section 001: Wednesdays, 9:30am-12:30pm, SSC 3022 
Section 002: Tuesdays, 9:30am-12:30pm, SSC 2028 
Section 003: Tuesdays, 1:30pm-4:30pm, 3M 3250 
1.2 
Course Description: 
This course provides overview of issues in financial management and corporate finance. Students 
will learn how financial managers make investment, financing and other decisions and the tools 
they use to make such decisions. Topics covered include time value of money, risk, valuation, 
capital structure, dividend policy and other selected issues.  
Antirequisite(s) at Main campus: Financial Modelling 2555A/B, and MOS 3310A/B. Antirequisite(s) 
at Brescia campus: MOS 3310A/B. Extra Information: 3 lecture hours. Note: Students interested in 
pursuing an HBA Degree at the Richard Ivey School of Business should not take this course in 
second year as Ivey does not recognize this course as part of the HBA degree. 
Prerequisite(s): Enrolment in BMOS, Music Administrative Studies (MAS), or Honors Specialization 
in Urban Development. 
1.3 
Accessibility: 
DAN Department of Management & Organizational Studies strives at all times to provide 
accessibility to all faculty, staff, students and visitors in a way that respects the dignity and 
independence of people with disabilities.   
Contact Academic Support & Engagement at http://academicsupport.uwo.ca/ for information about 
Western’s Accessible Education.   
More information about “Accessibility at Western” is available at: http://accessibility.uwo.ca 
1.4 
Land Acknowledgement: 
We acknowledge that Western University is located on the traditional lands of the Anishinaabek, 
Haudenosaunee, Lūnaapéewak and Attawandaron peoples, on lands connected with the London 
Township and Sombra Treaties of 1796 and the Dish with One Spoon Covenant Wampum. 
  
With this, we respect the longstanding relationships that Indigenous Nations have to this land, as 
they are the original caretakers. We acknowledge historical and ongoing injustices that Indigenous 
Peoples (e.g. First Nations, Métis and Inuit) endure in Canada, and we accept responsibility as a 
public institution to contribute toward revealing and correcting miseducation as well as renewing 
respectful relationships with Indigenous communities through our teaching, research and 
community service.  
https://indigenous.uwo.ca/initiatives/docs/indigenous-land-acknowledgment.pdf 
1.5 
Senate Regulations 
Senate Regulations state, “unless you have either the requisites for this course or written special 
permission from your Dean to enroll in it, you will be removed from this course and it will be deleted 
from your record. This decision may not be appealed. You will receive no adjustment to your fees 
in the event that you are dropped from a course for failing to have the necessary prerequisites.” 
 
This regulation is in regard to the PREREQUISITE COURSES required. 
   
Students not in BMOS are permitted to enroll in up to 1.0 MOS courses, per the Academic 
Timetable. The requirement that states you must be in BMOS is lifted during registration on the 
priority lift dates as noted in the Timetable.  
2. Course Materials 
Ross, S.A., Westerfield, R.W., Jordan, B.D., Pandes, J.A., Holloway, T.A., 2012. Fundamentals of 
Corporate Finance, Eleventh Canadian Edition. McGraw-Hill. ISBN: 9781260305869 
 
(Please note that the above ISBN includes the physical textbook and online access to Connect (required 
for optional course assignment), and the e-book. Students who do not wish to have a physical textbook 
may wish to choose the online only option, which includes access to the e-book only and Connect for 360 
days. The ISBN for this option is 9781265024611, and it can be purchased through the Western 
Bookstore via the “Alternative” option for this course. 
3. Course Objectives and Format 
The DAN Department of Management and Organizational Studies as a whole draws upon an evidence-
based management approach. Evidence-based management is the systematic process of gathering 
evidence from multiple sources, critically appraising the evidence, and using that evidence in making and 
evaluating management decisions to improve organizational performance. 
3.1 
Course objectives 
• 
The objective of this course is to introduce the participant to the fundamentals of corporate 
finance. Every decision that a corporation makes has financial implications, and any decision 
which affects the finances of a corporation is a corporate finance decision. The participant will 
learn how these business decisions are tied together by one powerful concept, the Valuation 
Principle. 
 
• 
Whether you plan to major in finance or simply take this one course, you will find the fundamental 
financial knowledge gained to be essential in your personal and business lives. 
3.2 
Course format 
The course is scheduled as a series of 3-hour in-person lectures. Some class time might be set 
aside for course administration. 
The course format is subject to change based on Covid-19 protocols or restrictions. Therefore, 
aspects of this course MAY be conducted in a hybrid format with asynchronous course material, 
and weekly synchronous discussion/tutorials. Any such tutorial sessions will be conducted via 
Zoom during regularly scheduled class time, and will be intended to be interactive.  
Any remote learning sessions for this course MAY be recorded from time to time. The data 
captured during these recordings may include your image, voice recordings, chat logs and personal 
identifiers (name displayed on the screen). The recordings will be used for educational purposes 
related to this course, including evaluations. The recordings may be disclosed to other individuals 
under special circumstances. Please contact the instructor if you have any concerns related to 
session recordings. 
Participants in this course are not permitted to record the sessions, except where the participant 
has the prior written permission of the instructor. 
Course delivery with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic: 
Although the intent is for this course to be delivered in-person, the changing COVID-19 landscape 
may necessitate some or all of the course to be delivered online, either synchronously (i.e., at the 
times indicated in the timetable) or asynchronously (e.g., posted on OWL for students to view at 
their convenience).  The grading scheme will not change.  Any assessments affected will be 
conducted online as determined by the course instructor. 
When deemed necessary, tests and examinations in this course will be conducted using a remote 
proctoring service.  By taking this course, you are consenting to the use of this software and 
acknowledge that you will be required to provide personal information (including some 
biometric data) and the session will be recorded.  Completion of this course will require you to have 
a reliable internet connection and a device that meets the technical requirements for this 
service.  More information about this remote proctoring service, including technical requirements, is 
available on Western’s Remote Proctoring website at: https://remoteproctoring.uwo.ca. 
4. Learning Outcomes
Upon completion of the course, successful students should be able to: 
•
Demonstrate basic knowledge of financial markets and institutions and explain how firms obtain
funds in the markets and at what cost
•
Calculate the time value of money and apply the concepts to the valuation of financial securities
such as bonds and stocks
•
Distinguish among various types of risks and apply the Capital Asset Pricing Model to calculate
returns, given appropriate risk measures
•
Calculate the cost of capital and solve capital budgeting problems
•
Explain how a firm might set its dividend policies
•
Analyze a firm’s performance to determine its strengths and weaknesses, and be able to use
financial analysis to improve performance
•
Explain various strategies for managing a firm’s short-term assets and liabilities
5. Evaluation
Textbook Reading Assignments = 5%  [Chapter readings and questions via McGraw Hill Connect] 
Professionalism & Contribution = 10%  [Includes iClicker & other; Refer to OWL for specific details] 
Group Case-Study Assignment  = 5%  [Due in early April, Refer to OWL for specific details] 
Problem Sets/Assignments 
= 5%  [6 assignments throughout the term via OWL, drop lowest score] 
Midterm Exam  
= 30%   [Tentatively scheduled for March 4, 1-3pm] 
Final Exam 
= 45%   [Cumulative, Scheduled by Registrar] 
IMPORTANT: Students must achieve a minimum grade of 50% on the final exam in order to 
achieve an overall passing grade in the course, and students must achieve a grade of at least 55% 
on at least one of the exam components of the course in order to achieve an overall grade of 60% 
or higher. 
Textbook reading assignments will be completed via McGraw Hill Connect, which is an online resource 
for the course textbook. Students will be required to answer simple self-assessment understanding 
questions associated with the reading that has been assigned. Grades for this component will be based 
on completion of the questions only. More information is provided on the course OWL site. If a student’s 
final exam score is higher than the student’s textbook reading assignment score, then the 
student’s final exam will be re-weighted to 50% of the overall course grade, and the reading 
assignment score will be weighted at 0%. Thus, any student who is unable to (or who chooses not to) 
complete the reading assignments via McGraw Hill Connect will automatically have the weight of that 
component shifted to the final exam. 
Six problem sets will be assigned for independent completion via OWL Tests & Quizzes. Question 
formats may include multiple choice, true/false, numeric answer, fill in the blank, or short answer. Problem 
sets will typically be assigned on a Friday and will be due for submission on the following Sunday at 
11:59pm (giving a three-day window for completion). Once started, most problem sets will have a time-
limit of 3-4 hours and will automatically be submitted once the time limit has been reached (though 
students may submit sooner). In addition, students will be required to complete a Data Analytics case 
study, which will be completed using either MS Excel or Power BI (TBD). More information is provided on 
the course OWL site. 
The midterm exam is expected to be delivered in-person, scheduled for 2 hours, and will consist of 
approximately 40 multiple choice questions. [This format and duration may change if Covid-19 
protocols require that the exam be delivered online] 
The final exam is expected to be scheduled for 3 hours and will consist of approximately 60 multiple 
choice questions. Question formats will be similar to the midterm exam. [This format and duration may 
change if Covid-19 protocols require that the exam be delivered online] 
Only non-programmable calculators will be allowed into the exams. Graphing calculators are not 
permitted! If you are unsure, please ask your professor to check your calculator.  
Electronic devices of any kind (including pagers, cell phones, smart watches, and 
programmable calculators) are NOT permitted at exams. If students have cell phones or other 
electronic devices, these devices MUST be turned off and stored away from the student during the exam. 
Devices many not be kept on exam desk or on students’ person (in pockets) during the exam, even if 
turned off. Contravention of this policy will be treated as an academic offense, and will result in an 
automatic grade of 0 (zero) on the exam. 
Exams will be scored using the program Scan Exam which examines the answer sheets for unusual 
coincidences in the pattern of answers given which may be indicative and used as supporting evidence of 
cheating. Suspected cheating on any exam will result in a grade of 0, and will initiate an investigation of 
academic offence. 
This course has other exam guidelines and expectations which are clearly outlined in a document on the 
course website. Students are expected to understand and adhere to these guidelines in order to avoid 
grade penalties.  
Students are responsible for all material covered during lectures or tutorials, as well as any assigned 
readings from the text or elsewhere on the course website.  
Students are REQUIRED TO COMPLETE ALL COMPONENTS of this course. Non-completion of 
components may result in a failing course grade. There are no exceptions to this. Extra assignments to 
improve grades will NOT be allowed. 
Grades will not be adjusted on the basis of need. It is important to monitor your performance in 
the course. Remember: You are responsible for your grades in this course. 
The instructor reserves the right to adjust all grade components and final grades, up or down, by 
standardizing to a pre-determined common mean range. As such, students’ grades will be partially 
determined based on their results relative the class average. Standardization of grades is designed to 
control for variations in assessment difficulty across different delivery methods, and to ensure fairness 
across sections. 
The DAN Department has a grade policy which states that for courses in the 2000 range, the class 
average must fall between 65% and 72% for all sections of a course taught by the same instructor.  In 
very exceptional circumstances only, class averages outside this range may be approved by the 
Undergraduate Chair or Chair.  Class averages are not grounds for appeal. 
6. Lecture and Examination Schedule
Please refer to OWL for a tentative detailed course schedule. The professor reserves the right to change 
or update this outline, and any other course related materials. Students will be informed in a timely 
manner through the course website and/or announcements. 
Material covered during lectures or tutorials, or in recorded videos, will not always be the same as 
material covered in the textbook. These two sources should be viewed as complimentary and not 
redundant.  
•
Chapter 1 Introduction
•
Chapter 2 (s. 2.1-2.4) Financial Statements (assigned as non-graded reading assignment)
•
Chapter 3 Financial Ratio Analysis
•
Non-text subject material: Using Data Analytics for Decision Making
•
Chapter 4 Long-term Financial Planning
•
Chapter 5 Time Value of Money
•
Chapter 6 Discounted Cash Flow Analysis
•
Chapter 7 (s. 7.1–7.3, 7.5–7.7) Bond Valuation
•
Chapter 8 (s. 8.1–8.3) Stock Valuation
•
Chapter 15 (s. 15.1–15.4) Raising Capital (partially assigned as reading)
•
Chapter 9 (s. 9.1 - 9.6) Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria
•
Chapter 11 (s. 11.1–11.5) Project Analysis and Evaluation
•
Chapter 12 Capital Market History (partially assigned as reading)
•
Chapter 13 (s. 13.1, 13.2, 13.4-13.7) Return, Risk, and the Security Market Line
•
Chapter 14 (s. 14.1–14.4, 14.8) Cost of Capital
•
Chapter 16 (s. 16.1–16.3, 16.5, 16.8) Financial Leverage and Capital Structure
•
Chapter 17 Dividend Policy
•
Chapter 18 (s. 18.1, 18.2, 18.4-18.6) Short-term Financial Planning
•
Chapter 19 (s. 19.1, 19.3) Cash and Liquidity Management
•
Chapter 20 (s. 20.1- 20.3, 20.6) Credit and Inventory Management
7. Student Responsibilities
Students should familiarize themselves with Western University Senate Regulations, please see: 
http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/academic_policies/index.html. 
Material covered in lectures will not always be the same as material covered in the textbook. These two 
sources should be viewed as complimentary and not redundant. As such, students who want to do well in 
this course are strongly encouraged to attend lectures on a regular basis. Please note that the instructor 
will not be providing copies of lectures notes or overheads. Therefore, if you miss a lecture, you should try 
to obtain this material from another student.  
7.1 
Respect 
Please act respectfully towards the classroom, the Professor and your fellow students. Acting 
respectfully means arriving on time, turning off phones, avoiding private discussions during 
lectures, refraining from viewing non-course material on your laptops, and cleaning up after 
yourself. Acting respectfully provides a better learning experience for everyone. 
Private in-class discussions are distracting to students and the Professor. If other students are 
distracting your attention from the material, you should ask them to be quiet. If you feel 
uncomfortable doing this (or the problem persists), please see the instructor.  
Late arrivals are also distracting. Please try to arrive on time for classes. 
7.2 
No Recording of Classes
Students are not permitted to record any portion of a class, audio or video, without the prior written 
permission of the professor. 
7.3 
Copyright Notice 
Lectures and course materials, including power point presentations, outlines, and similar materials, 
are protected by copyright.  You may take notes and make copies of course materials for your own 
educational use. You may not record lectures, reproduce (or allow others to reproduce), post or 
distribute lecture notes, wiki material, and other course materials publicly and/or for commercial 
purposes without my written consent.
8. Exam Policies
•
Bring student identification to exams.
•
Nothing is to be on/at one's desk during an exam except a pencil, an eraser, an approved calculator,
and the individual’s student card
•
No smart watches, smart phones, other electronic devices are permitted at exams
•
This course has other exam guidelines and expectations which are clearly outlined in a
document on the course website. Students are expected to understand and adhere to these
guidelines in order to avoid grade penalties.
9. E-mail Policies
The following policies apply to all emails between students and the Professor. Please respect the fact that 
the Professor receives hundreds of emails from students and must deal with those emails in a fair and 
organized manner. Unacceptable emails will receive a reply saying only “Please see Email Policies on the 
course outline”. 
9.1 
UWO.CA Email Addresses Only 
For privacy reasons, students must use their Western email accounts to contact the Professor. The 
Professor will not respond to emails from non-uwo.ca addresses (e.g. hotmail.com, gmail.com, 
etc.). 
9.2 
Subject Line Must Include Course and Section Number 
The subject line of emails must contain the name or number of the course, and the section number 
in which the student is enrolled. The Professor teaches different courses and sections and cannot 
properly respond to questions if he does not know which course or section you are enrolled in. 
9.3 
Acceptable Emails 
• asking to set up an appointment to ask questions or review an exam
• notification of illness or other special circumstances
• providing constructive comments or feedback about the course
9.4 
Unacceptable Emails 
• questions that may be answered on OWL or on this course outline
• questions about course content or materials (these should be directed to OWL Discussions)
• asking when grades will be posted
• asking what grade a student received
• asking where or when an exam is scheduled or the material covered on an exam
• requests for grade increases, extra assignments, or reweighting of course components
10. Attendance
IN-PERSON: It is expected that students will attend all classes. The professor does not provide access to 
lecture notes. Students are encouraged to obtain missed lecture notes from a fellow student.  
10.1 Short Absences. 
If you miss a class due to minor illness or other problems, check your course outlines for 
information regarding attendance requirements and make sure you are not missing a test or exam. 
Cover any readings and arrange to borrow the missed lectures notes from a classmate.  
10.2 Extended Absences. 
If you are absent more than approximately two weeks or if you get too far behind to catch up, you 
should consider reducing your workload by dropping one or more courses. The Academic 
Counsellors can help you to consider the alternatives. At your request, they can also keep your 
instructors informed about your difficulties.  
11. Grade Fairness
Fairness requires that all students be treated equally and be evaluated using the criteria set out in this 
course outline. The evaluation criteria are based on actual achievement and not on how hard a student 
has tried.  
Claims by students of an excellent academic history, good attendance record, need to obtain or maintain 
a scholarship, desire to be admitted to Ivey or graduate school, or other personal issues, cannot be used 
to justify a higher grade in the course or a reweighting of course components. There is no extra work or 
assignments available for extra credit or to “make up” for a course component that was missed or 
performed poorly. 
You, the student, are responsible for the grades earned. 
12. Posting of Grades
Midterm exam grades will be posted on OWL once the grades are available. Final exam grades and final 
course grades are not posted on OWL and are available once they have been posted by the Registrar 
under “Academic Summary” at the Student Centre website. 
13. University Policy Regarding Illness, Absence and Accommodation
13.1 Illness 
Students will need to provide a Student Medical Certificate if the absence is medical or provide 
appropriate documentation if there are compassionate grounds for the absence in question. 
Students are encouraged to contact their Faculty Academic Counselling office to obtain more 
information about the relevant documentation. 
For privacy reasons, students should also note that individual instructors should not receive 
documentation directly from a student, whether in support of an application for consideration on 
medical grounds, or for other reasons. All documentation required for absences must be submitted 
to the Academic Counselling office of a student's Home Faculty. 
For details on the Policy on Accommodation for Medical Illness, go to: 
https://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/accommodation_medical%2015JUN.pdf 
Students can download the Student Medical Certificate (SMC) here: 
https://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/medicalform.pdf 
13.2 Accessible Education 
Students with disabilities work with Accessible Education (formerly SSD) which provides 
recommendations for accommodation based on medical documentation or psychological and 
cognitive testing. The accommodation policy can be found here: 
https://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/Academic 
Accommodation_disabilities.pdf 
Students needing access to Accessible Education should register here: 
http://academicsupport.uwo.ca/accessible_education/index.html 
13.3 Religious Accommodation 
Students should consult the University's list of recognized religious holidays, and should give 
reasonable notice in writing, prior to the holiday, to the Instructor and an Academic Counsellor if 
their course requirements will be affected by a religious observance. Additional information is given 
in the Western Multicultural Calendar. 
13.4 Make Up Examinations 
There is no make-up midterm exam in this course. If a student misses the regularly scheduled 
exam for any reason, and for which adequate documentation is received by the instructor (this 
documentation must be supplied by the Academic Counseling office), then the student will 
receive a modified and lengthened final exam which will be re-weighted to 75% of the 
course grade weight. 
If a student misses the regularly scheduled final exam for any reason, and for which adequate 
documentation is received by the instructor (this documentation must be supplied by the Academic 
Counseling office), then the student must write a make-up exam. The date and time of the final 
exam make-up will be set by the instructor, who will communicate the date to the student. The 
format of the final exam make-up may be different than the format of the regularly scheduled exam, 
but will contain the same breadth and depth of coverage. 
If a student is unable to meet the scheduled make-up as agreed, then the student is responsible for 
obtaining new accommodations from Academic Counselling, and seeking a new make-up date with 
the instructor within a reasonable time frame. Students who miss a final exam make-up for 
legitimate reasons will typically be offered an opportunity to write an alternative make-up during the 
final exam period the next time the course is offered. 
13.5 Accommodation for missed Problem Sets, Reading Assignments, & Contribution 
Universal accommodation is built-in to the grading policy for Problem Sets, Reading Assignments, 
& Contribution by automatic grade adjustments. Please refer to the course expectation documents 
for further information. In general, there are no extensions, make-ups, or re-writes for any 
missed problem sets, reading assignments, or missed contribution opportunities (via 
iClicker or other) during lectures. Students who face extraordinary circumstances, which require 
multiple assessments to be missed, should seek advice and/or accommodation through the 
Academic Counselling office of their respective faculty. In such rare instances, grade re-weighting 
may be available on a case-by-case basis. 
14. University Policy on Cheating and Academic Misconduct 
 
Scholastic offences are taken seriously and students are directed to read the appropriate policy, 
specifically, the definition of what constitutes a Scholastic Offence, at the following Web site: 
http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/scholastic_discipline_undergrad.pdf 
Students are responsible for understanding the nature of and avoiding the occurrence of plagiarism and 
other academic offenses. Students are urged to read the section on Scholastic Offenses in the Academic 
Calendar.  
Note that such offenses include plagiarism, cheating on an examination, submitting false or fraudulent 
assignments or credentials, impersonating a candidate, or submitting for credit in any course without the 
knowledge and approval of the instructor to whom it is submitted, any academic work for which credit has 
previously been obtained or is being sought in another course in the University or elsewhere. If you are in 
doubt about whether what you are doing is inappropriate, consult your instructor. A claim that "you didn't 
know it was wrong" will not be accepted as an excuse.  
A copy of guidelines about how to avoid cheating can be obtained from the Office of the Ombudsperson, 
Room 3135 WSSB, (519) 661-3573, ombuds@uwo.ca.  
Cheating on exams will not be tolerated; students are referred to the university policy on scholastic 
offenses. Looking at the test of another student, allowing another student to view your exam, or obtaining 
information about a test in advance are all examples of cheating.  
Students found cheating will receive a zero (0%) on that exam. A number of safeguards will be employed 
to discourage cheating. For example, examination supervisors (proctors) of the tests may ask students to 
move to another seat during the exam, cover their paper, avert their eyes from other students' papers, 
remove baseball caps, etc. This is not meant as a personal affront nor as an accusation of cheating, 
rather as vigilant attempts at proctoring.  
The penalties for a student guilty of a scholastic offense include refusal of a passing grade in the 
assignment, refusal of a passing grade in the course, suspension from the University, and expulsion from 
the University. 
15. Procedures For Appealing Academic Evaluations 
1. In the first instance, all appeals of a grade must be made to the course instructor (informal 
consultation).  
2. If the student is not satisfied with the decision of the course instructor, a written appeal must be sent 
to the Undergraduate Chair: Student Affairs of the Department of Management and Organizational 
Studies.  
3. If the response of the Undergraduate Chair is considered unsatisfactory to the student, he/she may 
then appeal to the Dean of the Faculty in which the course of program was taken.  
4. Only after receiving a final decision from the Dean may a student appeal to the Senate Review 
Board Academic. A Guide to Appeals is available from the Office of the Ombudsperson. 
16. Support Services 
16.1 Support Services  
The Registrar’s office provides you with information on services, courses, student finances, 
resources, latest news, as well as Student Central's hours of operation at 
http://www.registrar.uwo.ca 
Student Support Services (including the services provided by the USC listed here) can be 
reached at: http://westernusc.ca/services/ 
Academic Support & Engagement can be reached at:  http://academicsupport.uwo.ca 
Students who are in emotional/mental distress should refer to Health and Wellness: 
http://www.uwo.ca/uwocom/mentalhealth/ for a complete list of options about how to obtain help. 
16.2 Academic Concerns.  
If you are in academic difficulty, it is strongly recommended that you see your academic counsellor.  
 
