Faculty of 
Social Science 
 
MOS 2310A Finance 
Course Outline: Sections – 001, 002, 003; Fall 2017 
1. Course Information: 
1.1 Class Location and Time: 
Section 
Day 
Start Time 
End Time 
Location 
001 
Tuesday 
9:30 am 
12:30 pm 
BGSB 0153 
002 
Tuesday 
1:30 pm 
4:30 pm 
BGSB 0165 
003 
Friday 
9:30 am 
12:30 pm 
SSC 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 Contact Information: 
Instructor: Danny L. Morrison 
Office: SSC 4419 
Office Hours: Wednesday 8am – 12 noon  
Phone: 661-2111 x87273 
Email: dmorri28@uwo.ca 
DAN Management and Organizational Studies strives at all times to provide accessibility to all 
faculty, staff, students and visitors in a way that respects the dignity and independence of people 
with disabilities.  Please contact the course instructor if you require material in an alternate format or 
if you require any other arrangements to make this course more accessible to you. You may also 
wish to contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 519-661-2147 for any specific 
question regarding an accommodation.   
More information about “Accessibility at Western” is available at: http://accessibility.uwo.ca 
2. Calendar Description 
2.1 Course Description: 
This course provides overview of issues in financial management and corporate finance. Students will learn 
how financial managers make investment, financing and other decisions and the tools they use to make such 
decisions. Topics covered include time value of money, risk, valuation, capital structure, dividend policy and 
other selected issues. 
 
3 lecture hours, 0.5 course 
Antirequisite(s): Financial Modelling 2555A/B, the former Actuarial Science 2555A/B and MOS 
3310A/B 
Prerequisite(s): MOS 1020A/B or both MOS 1021A/B and 1023A/B and enrolment in BMOS or 
Music Administrative Studies (MAS). 
NOTE: Students interested in pursuing an HBA Degree at the Richard Ivey School of Business 
must defer MOS 2310A/B and 2320A/B until Year 3. These two courses will not count towards the 
10.0 credits required for admission to the HBA Program and are discouraged for those students 
continuing on to the Richard Ivey School of Business. Students continuing in MOS must complete 
MOS 2310A/B and 2320A/B in Year 3 prior to enrolling in MOS courses for which these courses 
are the prerequisite. 
2.2 Senate Regulations 
Senate Regulations state, “unless you have either the requisites for this course or written special 
permission from your Dean to enroll in it, you will be removed from this course and it will be deleted 
from your record. This decision may not be appealed. You will receive no adjustment to your fees in 
the event that you are dropped from a course for failing to have the necessary prerequisites.” 
 
This regulation is in regards to the COURSES required.  Students not in BMOS are permitted to 
enroll in up to 1.0 MOS courses, per the Academic Timetable. 
3. Textbook 
Berk, Johathan, DeMarzo, Peter, Harford, Jarrad, Stangeland, David and Marosi, Andras, 2017. 
Fundamentals of Corporate Finance. Second Canadian Edition. Pearson. ISBN: 9780134384290 
This includes access to the eText and Learning Catalytics for students, as well as the additional study 
resources through MyFinanceLab. 
4. Course Objectives and Format 
4.1 Course objectives 
• The objective of this course is to introduce the participant to the fundamentals of 
corporate finance. Every decision that a corporation makes has financial implications, 
and any decision which affects the finances of a corporation is a corporate finance 
decision. The participant will learn how these business decisions are tied together by one 
powerful concept, the Valuation Principle. 
• Whether you plan to major in finance or simply take this one course, you will find the 
fundamental financial knowledge gained to be essential in your personal and business 
lives. 
4.2 Course format 
The course is scheduled as a series of 3-hour lecture and students answering in-class questions to introduce 
topics in the course curriculum. Some class time might be set aside for course administration. 
5. Learning Outcomes 
Upon completion of the course, successful students should be able to: 
• 
Demonstrate basic knowledge of financial markets and institutions and explain how firms obtain funds in 
the markets and at what cost 
• 
Calculate the time value of money and apply the concepts to the valuation of financial securities such as 
bonds and stocks 
• 
Distinguish among various types of risks and apply the Capital Asset Pricing Model to calculate returns, 
given appropriate risk measures 
• 
Calculate the cost of capital and solve capital budgeting problems 
• 
Explain how a firm might set its dividend policies 
• 
Analyze a firm’s performance to determine its strengths and weaknesses, and be able to use financial 
analysis to improve performance 
• 
Explain various strategies for managing a firm’s short-term assets and liabilities 
6. Evaluation 
Insert information about exams and assignments and other components of the grade.  Update the 
information below describing the exam and any relevant procedures as well.  
Segment of Evaluation 
Percentage of Course 
Grade  
Weekly In-class assignments 
10%  
Quizzes (4)  
15%  
Midterm exam 
35% 
Final exam 
40%  
6.1 Exams 
Exams are multiple choice in format. Each exam, in total, will be scheduled for 2 hours, consist of 40 
questions, and are closed book examinations. Dictionaries are NOT allowed into the examinations.  
Only non-programmable calculators will be allowed into the exams. If you are unsure, please ask 
your professor to check your calculator. All electronic devices (includes cell phones) must be turned off 
and put away in your bag. They may not be on your person. Anyone found with an electronic device on 
their person will receive a grade of zero on the exam. 
Students are responsible for material covered in the lectures as well as the assigned chapters/sections in 
the text. The final exam will be scheduled during the exam period. Exams will not be returned to students 
but may be reviewed in the instructor’s office.  
Students are REQUIRED TO COMPLETE ALL COMPONENTS of this course. There are no exceptions 
to this. Extra assignments to improve grades will NOT be allowed.  
Exams will be scored using the program Scan Exam which examines the answer sheets for unusual 
coincidences in the pattern of answers given which may be indicative and used as supporting evidence of 
cheating. 
6.2 Quizzes 
Details and due dates will be posted on the course website. The four quizzes collectively are worth 15% 
towards your total grade. There are no makeup assignments/quizzes. Therefore, it is very important that 
you complete the assignments/quizzes on time. Late assignments/quizzes will not be accepted. Failure to 
submit by the due date will result in a grade of zero. 
6.3 Weekly In-class assignments 
Using interactive student response tool (students’ smart phones, tablets or laptops) to answer questions 
during class to access their understanding in real time. The top ten (10) weekly results collectively are 
worth 10% towards your total grade. There are no makeup weekly in-class assignments. Therefore, it is 
very important that you attend each class and participate in the weekly in-class assignments. 
Grades will not be adjusted on the basis of need. It is important to monitor your performance in 
the course. Remember: You are responsible for your grades in this course. 
7. Lecture and Examination Schedule 
• 
Chapter 1 Corporate Finance and the Financial Manager  
• 
Chapter 2 Introduction to Financial Statement Analysis 
• 
Chapter 3 The Valuation Principle: The Foundation of Financial Decision Making  
• 
Chapter 4 Time Value of Money 
• 
Chapter 5 Interest Rates  
• 
Chapter 6 Bonds  
• 
Chapter 7 Valuing Stocks  
• 
Chapter 8 Investment Decision Rules  
• 
Chapter 9 Fundamentals of Capital Budgeting 
• 
Chapter 10 Risk and Return in Capital Markets  
• 
Chapter 11 Systematic Risk and the Equity Risk Premium  
• 
Chapter 12 Determining the Cost of Capital   
• 
Chapter 14 Raising Equity Capital 
• 
Chapter 15 Debt Financing   
• 
Chapter 16 Capital Structure  
• 
Chapter 17 Payout Policy 
• 
Chapter 18 Financial Modelling and Pro Forma Analysis  
• 
Chapter 19 Working Capital Management  
• 
Chapter 20 Short-term Financial Planning   
A detailed lecture schedule will be posted on the course website. 
Ideally, you should do the required readings before the topic is covered in class. Lectures are 
intended to highlight certain areas of each topic--there is not enough time available for us to cover all 
the material in class. However, you are responsible for all the material in the text. Thus, it is 
important for you to keep up with the readings. Students should also note that the workload for this 
course is heavy and should schedule their time accordingly. 
8. University Policy Regarding Illness 
8.1 Illness 
The University recognizes that a student’s ability to meet his/her academic responsibilities may, on 
occasion, be impaired by medical illness. Illness may be acute (short term), or it may be chronic 
(long term), or chronic with acute episodes. The University further recognizes that medical 
situations are deeply personal and respects the need for privacy and confidentiality in these 
matters. However, in order to ensure fairness and consistency for all students, academic 
accommodation for work representing 10% or more of the student’s overall grade in the course 
shall be granted only in those cases where there is documentation supplied (see below for 
process) indicating that the student was seriously affected by illness and could not reasonably be 
expected to meet his/her academic responsibilities.  
 
Documentation shall be submitted, as soon as possible, to the appropriate Dean’s office (the Office 
of the Dean of the student’s Faculty of registration/home Faculty) together with a request for relief 
specifying the nature of the accommodation being requested. These documents will be retained in 
the student’s file, and will be held in confidence in accordance with the University’s Official Student 
Record Information Privacy Policy 
http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/general/privacy.pdf 
Once the petition and supporting documents have been received and assessed, appropriate 
academic accommodation shall be determined by the Dean’s Office in consultation with the 
student’s instructor(s). Academic accommodation may include extension of deadlines, waiver of 
attendance requirements for classes/labs/tutorials, arranging Special Exams or Incompletes, re-
weighting course requirements, or granting late withdrawals without academic penalty.  
 
Academic accommodation shall be granted only where the documentation indicates that the onset, 
duration and severity of the illness are such that the student could not reasonably be expected to 
complete his/her academic responsibilities. (Note: it will not be sufficient to provide documentation 
indicating simply that the student was seen for a medical reason or was ill.)  
 
A form to be completed by off-campus physicians is available at: 
http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/medicalform.pdf  
 
Whenever possible, students who require academic accommodation should provide notification 
and documentation in advance of due dates, examinations, etc. Students must follow up with their 
professors and their Academic Counselling office in a timely manner.  
 
In the case of a final examination in the course, the student must arrange for a Special Examination 
or Incomplete through their Dean's office, for which you will be required to provide acceptable 
documentation.  
 
If you feel that you have a medical or personal problem that is interfering with your work, you 
should contact your instructor and the Faculty Academic Counselling Office as soon as possible. 
Problems may then be documented and possible arrangements to assist you can be discussed at 
the time of occurrence rather than on a retroactive basis. In general, retroactive requests for grade 
revisions on medical or compassionate grounds will not be considered. 
 
8.2 Make Up Examinations 
The student must write a make-up exam if the regularly scheduled exam is missed for reasons for 
which adequate documentation is received by the instructor (this documentation must be supplied 
by the Academic Counseling office). The make-up may differ from the original exam. 
8.3 Attendance  
It is expected that students will attend all classes. The professor does not provide access to lecture 
notes. Students are encouraged to obtain missed lecture notes from a fellow student. 
9. University Policy on Cheating and Academic Misconduct 
Cheating on exams will not be tolerated; students are referred to the university policy on scholastic 
offenses. Looking at the test of another student, allowing another student to view your exam, or 
obtaining information about a test in advance are all examples of cheating. Students found cheating 
will receive a zero (0%) on that exam. A number of safeguards will be employed to discourage 
cheating. For example, examination supervisors (proctors) of the tests may ask students to move to 
another seat during the exam, cover their paper, avert their eyes from other students' papers, 
remove baseball caps, etc. This is not meant as a personal affront nor as an accusation of cheating, 
rather as vigilant attempts at proctoring. A copy of guidelines about how to avoid cheating can be 
obtained from the office of the Ombudsperson, Room 3135 WSSB, (519) 661-3573, 
ombuds@uwo.ca.  
Students are responsible for understanding the nature of and avoiding the occurrence of plagiarism 
and other academic offenses. Students are urged to read the section on Scholastic Offenses in the 
Academic Calendar. Note that such offenses include plagiarism, cheating on an examination, 
submitting false or fraudulent assignments or credentials, impersonating a candidate, or submitting 
for credit in any course without the knowledge and approval of the instructor to whom it is submitted, 
any academic work for which credit has previously been obtained or is being sought in another 
course in the University or elsewhere. If you are in doubt about whether what you are doing is 
inappropriate, consult your instructor. A claim that "you didn't know it was wrong" will not be 
accepted as an excuse.  
The penalties for a student guilty of a scholastic offense include refusal of a passing grade in the 
assignment, refusal of a passing grade in the course, suspension from the University, and expulsion 
from the University. 
10. Procedures For Appealing Academic Evaluations 
1. In the first instance, all appeals of a grade must be made to the course instructor (informal 
consultation).  
2. If the student is not satisfied with the decision of the course instructor, a written appeal must be 
sent to the Undergraduate Chair: Student Affairs of the Department of Management and 
Organizational Studies.  
3. If the response of the Undergraduate Chair is considered unsatisfactory to the student, he/she 
may then appeal to the Dean of the Faculty in which the course of program was taken.  
4. Only after receiving a final decision from the Dean, may a student appeal to the Senate Review 
Board Academic. A Guide to Appeals is available from the Ombudsperson's Office. 
11. Student Responsibilities 
Material covered in lectures will not always be the same as material covered in the textbook. These 
two sources should be viewed as complimentary and not redundant. As such, students who want to 
do well in this course are strongly encouraged to attend lectures on a regular basis. Please note 
that the instructor will not be providing copies of lectures notes or overheads. Therefore, if you miss 
a lecture, you should try to obtain this material from another student.  
 
In this class, some students may be unaware that their private discussions are distracting to other 
people. If you feel that students are distracting your attention from the material, then you should ask 
them to be quiet. If you feel uncomfortable doing this (or the problem persists), then please see the 
instructor. In addition, please avoid engaging in private discussions with other students during the 
lectures.  
 
To avoid unnecessary distractions, please arrive to each class on time. 
12. Support Services 
12.1 Support Services  
The Registrar’s office can be accessed for Student Support Services at http://www.registrar.uwo.ca 
Student Support Services (including the services provided by the USC listed here) can be 
reached at:  http://westernusc.ca/services/ 
Student Development Services can be reached at:  http://www.sdc.uwo.ca/  
Students who are in emotional/mental distress should refer to Mental Health@Western 
http://www.health.uwo.ca/mental_health/  for a complete list of options about how to obtain help. 
13. Other Issues 
13.1 Grade Policy 
The DAN Program has a grade policy which states that for courses in the 2000-2999 range, the 
class average must fall between 65% and 72% for all sections of a course taught by the same 
instructor.  In very exceptional circumstances only, class averages outside this range may be 
approved by the Undergraduate Chair or Chair.  Class averages are not grounds for appeal. 
13.2 Short Absences. 
If you miss a class due to minor illness or other problems, check your course outlines for 
information regarding attendance requirements and make sure you are not missing a test or exam. 
Cover any readings and arrange to borrow the missed lectures notes from a classmate.  
13.3 Extended Absences.  
If you are absent more than approximately two weeks or if you get too far behind to catch up, you 
should consider reducing your workload by dropping one or more courses. The Academic 
Counsellors can help you to consider the alternatives. At your request, they can also keep your 
instructors informed about your difficulties.  
13.4 Academic Concerns.  
If you are in academic difficulty, it is strongly recommended that you see your academic counsellor.  
13.5 Important Dates: 
 
September 7: Classes Begin 
September 15: Last day to add a full course (E or no-suffix), first term half course (A or F), full-year half 
course (Y) 
October 9: Thanksgiving Holiday (All offices closed) 
October 9 – 13: Fall Reading Week (No Classes; All offices open Oct 10 - 13) 
October 28: Midterm Exam 
November 12: Last day to drop a first term half course without academic penalty 
November 30: Last day to drop a full course without academic penalty 
December 8: Classes end 
December 9: Study Day 
December 10 – 21: Mid-year Examination Period (Check your Exams Carefully!) 
December 22 – January 7: Winter break (All offices closed December 22 – January 1) 
14. Other Information 
• 
Bring student identification to exams. 
• 
Nothing is to be on/at one's desk during an exam except a pencil, an eraser, and the individual’s 
student card  
• 
Do not wear baseball caps to exams  
• 
Do not bring music players, cell phones, beepers, or other electronic devices to exams 
• 
All electronic devices (includes cell phones) must be turned off and put away in your bag. They 
may not be on your person. Anyone found with an electronic device on their person will receive 
a grade of zero on the exam.  
 
For The University of Western Ontario Senate Regulations, please see the Handbook of 
Academic and Scholarship Policy at: http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/academic_policies/index.html 
15. E-mail Policies  
The following policies apply to all emails between students and the Professor. Please respect the 
fact that the Professor receives hundreds of emails from students and must deal with those emails in 
a fair and organized manner. Unacceptable emails will receive a reply saying only “Please see Email 
Policies on the course outline”. 
15.1 UWO.CA Email Addresses Only 
For privacy reasons, students must use their Western email accounts to contact the Professor. The 
Professor will not respond to emails from non-uwo.ca addresses (e.g. hotmail.com, gmail.com, 
etc.). 
15.2 Subject Line Must Include Course and Section Number 
The subject line of emails must contain the name or number of the course, and the section number 
in which the student is enrolled. The Professor teaches different courses and sections and cannot 
properly respond to questions if he does not know which course or section you are enrolled in. 
15.3 Acceptable Emails 
• questions about the course content or materials 
• asking to set up an appointment to ask questions or review an exam 
• notification of illness or other special circumstances 
• providing constructive comments or feedback about the course 
15.4 Unacceptable Emails 
• questions that may be answered on OWL or on this course outline 
• asking when grades will be posted 
• asking what grade a student received 
• asking where or when an exam is scheduled or the material covered on an exam 
• requests for grade increases, extra assignments, or reweighting of course components 
 
 
16. FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS 
Question 
Answer 
How can I succeed in this course? 
Do all the assigned readings, attend class, focus 
on understanding the principles in a way that lets 
you apply them to new fact situations. 
I missed the quiz because my computer didn’t 
work, my internet connection was lost, I was 
preparing my Business 2257 project, I was out of 
town, I lost my phone, I forgot … 
A missed quiz will result in a mark of zero. You 
are responsible for calendaring the quizzes and 
having reliable internet access to write them. 
There are no “make up” assignments available. 
I missed a quiz or exam because I was sick or 
there was a death in my family. 
See the section of the course outline on ILLNESS 
AND SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES 
I have a lot of mid-terms or projects at once. Can I 
write the make-up exam? 
Make-up exams for conflicts are not available 
unless you meet the Exam Conflict or Multiple 
Exam Situation scenarios. See website for 
instructions. 
When will the exam grades be posted? 
Mid-term grades are posted on OWL when they 
become available. Final exam grades and final 
course grades are not posted on OWL. 
Can I come and see my exam? 
You can review your exam during office hours or 
at any other mutually convenient time. 
Can I use a different textbook? 
You can use a different textbook, but it is your 
responsibility to ensure that you are learning all of 
the assigned material. Be aware that different 
textbooks may be organized differently and may 
cover different material. 
There is so much material. How can I possibly 
remember everything? 
You do not need to remember everything in the 
book. You need to understand the fundamental 
principles and how to apply them. 
This mark is going to prevent me from getting 
accepted at Ivey/graduate school/NASA. 
Grades are given based on actual performance, 
as set out on the course outline. In order to be fair 
to all the students in the course, grade 
adjustments, extra assignments, and the 
reweighting of course components are not 
available. 
I need a certain mark to get or maintain a 
scholarship or my AEO status at Ivey. 
I tried really hard but I still got a poor mark. 
This is the lowest mark I have ever received. 
 
