Finance 707 – Summer 2021 
 
 
 
Finance 707 
Financial Modelling 
Summer 2021 Course Outline 
 
Finance and Business Economics Area 
DeGroote School of Business 
McMaster University 
 
COURSE OBJECTIVE 
 
This course introduces the basics of financial modelling. This requires some understanding of 
finance and a basic knowledge of MS Excel.  
 
The course will examine the tools built into Excel and VBA and their use in financial 
modeling, with an emphasis on documentation and industry-best practices. The models used 
for this purpose include those covering financial statement forecasts, asset pricing, portfolio 
management, risk management, and other finance problems.  
 
INSTRUCTOR AND CONTACT INFORMATION 
 
C01: Fri 08:30–11:20 
CO2: Tue 19:00-22:00 
Martin Butcher 
Martin Butcher 
Instructor 
butchm1@mcmaster.ca 
Instructor 
butchm1@mcmaster.ca 
 
 
 
 
Tel: (905) 403-8286 
Tel: (905) 403-8286 
Class Location: Virtual 
Class Location: Virtual 
 
 
COURSE ELEMENTS 
  
  
  
  
Credit Value: 3 
Leadership: No 
IT skills: Yes 
Global view: No 
A2L: Yes 
Ethics: No 
Numeracy: Yes 
Written skills: Yes 
Participation: Yes 
Innovation: Yes 
Group work: Yes 
Oral skills: No 
Evidence-based: No 
Experiential: No 
Final Exam: Yes 
Guest speaker(s): No 
Finance 707 – Summer 2021:  Page 2 of 7 
 
COURSE DESCRIPTION 
 
Financial modelling involves the creation of tools that someone, other than the writer, can 
use to answer “what if” questions in finance. The course will examine the tools built into MS 
Excel and VBA and their use in financial modelling, with an emphasis on documentation and 
industry best practices. The tools employed will include use of an introductory programming 
language, and the integration of Excel with FinTech. 
 
A working knowledge of MS Excel is assumed, but no prior experience with VBA is required. 
 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 
Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to complete the following 
key tasks: 
 
➢ Identify the key finance and accounting terms and concepts used in financial models. 
➢ Apply best practices and efficiency tools for general-purpose spreadsheet modeling. 
➢ Determine the key input variables to a range of financial models. 
➢ Integrate and link key financial statements and ratios into a financial model. 
➢ Perform key sensitivity and scenario analyses under a range of assumptions. 
➢ Learn to document and test a financial model. 
➢ Learn to work with and use a range of external data with a spreadsheet model. 
➢ Learn to program a financial model using Visual Basic for Applications (VBA) 
 
COURSE MATERIALS AND READINGS 
 
Course Materials are available on Avenue To Learn 
 
Textbooks: 
 
 
Benninga; Financial Modeling; Fourth Edition; The MIT Press, 2014. ISBN: 978-
0262027281. Comprehensive finance-focused text, also useful in other finance courses  
 
 
 Walkenbach; Excel 2016 Bible; First Edition; Wiley, 2015.  ISBN: 978-1119067511. 
Traditional-style manual for Excel, helpful in gaining understanding of broader Excel usage  
Finance 707 – Summer 2021:  Page 3 of 7 
 
COURSE OVERVIEW AND ASSESSMENT 
 
Individual learning in this course results from in-class discussions, problem solving, and lab 
work. The balance of the individual learning results from lectures on specific topics, student 
research, and a group project centred on a financial model.  
 
Your final grade will be calculated as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COURSE DELIVERABLES 
 
Weekly Engagement (20%) 
10 weeks of asynchronous chat question and response at 2% per week. A detailed 
grading rubric will be posted on Avenue to Learn in Week 01. 
 
Test 1 (25%) – Week 6 
On-line test on material covered in the first six weeks of the course. Details will be 
posted on Avenue to Learn in Week 05. 
 
Test 2 (25%) – Week 12 
On-line test on material covered in the last six weeks of the course. Details will be 
posted on Avenue to Learn in Week 11. 
 
Group Project (30%) Innovation Project – Week 13 
Group project details will be posted on Avenue to Learn in Week 03. 
 
 
COMMUNICATION AND FEEDBACK 
 
Students who wish to correspond with instructors or class mates directly via email, must 
send messages that originate from their official McMaster University email account. This 
protects the confidentiality and sensitivity of information as well as confirms the identity of 
the student. Emails regarding course issues should NOT be sent to the Area Administrative 
Assistants.   
 
Weekly Engagement Questions
20%
Test 1:  (Week 6)
25%
Test 2: (Week 12)
25%
Group Project: (Week 13)
30%
TOTAL
100%
Finance 707 – Summer 2021:  Page 4 of 7 
 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY 
 
You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behavior in all aspects of the learning 
process. Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic 
integrity. It is your responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty 
 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behavior can result in serious consequences, 
e.g. the grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript 
(notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or 
expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic 
Integrity Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- 
guidelines/ 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 
• plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit 
has been obtained. 
• improper collaboration in group work. 
• copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 
 
COURSES WITH AN ONLINE ELEMENT 
 
Students should be aware that, when they access the electronic components of a course, 
private information such as first and last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail 
accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the same 
course.  
 
The available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation in a course that 
uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions 
or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the course instructor. 
 
CONDUCT EXPECTATIONS 
As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to 
demonstrate, respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and 
working communities. These expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & 
Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students share the responsibility of maintaining a positive 
environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community members, 
whether in person or online. 
 
Finance 707 – Summer 2021:  Page 5 of 7 
 
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in 
effect in virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely 
affect, disrupt, or interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student 
disruptions or behavior’s that interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use 
of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be 
investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access 
to these platforms. 
 
MISSED ACADEMIC WORK 
 
Where students miss a regularly scheduled mid-term or class participation for legitimate 
reasons as determined by the Student Experience – Academic (MBA) office, the weight for 
that test/participation will be distributed across other evaluative components of the course at 
the discretion of the instructor. Documentation explaining such an absence must be 
provided to the Student Experience – Academic (MBA) office within five (5) working days 
upon return to school. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
 
Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student 
Accessibility Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make 
arrangements with a Program Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster 
University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities policy. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION FOR RELIGIOUS, INDIGENOUS  
OR SPIRITUAL OBSERVANCES (RISO) 
 
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual 
observances should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should 
submit their request to their Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the 
beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for accommodation or to the Registrar's 
Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as soon as 
possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
 
COPYRIGHT AND RECORDING 
 
Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course 
material provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and 
Finance 707 – Summer 2021:  Page 6 of 7 
copyright law protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including 
lectures by University instructors.  
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a 
course. Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized 
distribution, or by a student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware 
that their voice and/or image may be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with 
the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
POTENTIAL MODIFICATION TO THE COURSE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the 
term. The university may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labor disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated 
through regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, A2L 
and/or McMaster email. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF COURSE POLICIES 
Your enrolment in Finance 707 will be considered to be an implicit acknowledgement of the 
course policies outlined above, or of any other that may be announced during lecture 
and/or on A2L. It is your responsibility to read this course outline, to familiarize 
yourself with the course policies and to act accordingly.  
Lack of awareness of the course policies cannot be invoked at any point during this course 
for failure to meet them. It is your responsibility to ask for clarification on any policies that you 
do not understand.  
Finance 707 – Summer 2021:  Page 7 of 7 
 
COURSE SCHEDULE 
 
Finance 707 - Financial Modelling 
Summer 2021 Course Schedule 
 
Meeting 
Week 
of 
Topics 
Excel 
1 
May 03 
Introduction Intro to Financial Modelling 
 
2 
May10 
Financial Statement Modelling I 
Forecasting financial statements using 
spreadsheets 
 
Excel functions / tools 
3 
May 17 
Financial Statement Modelling II  
Integrating financial statement worksheets, 
completing valuations. 
 
Excel functions / tools 
4 
May 24 
Portfolio Modelling Investment portfolios, 
betas, variances, performance 
measurement 
 
Data tables, arrays, pivot tables  
Matrix operations 
5 
May 31 
Forecasting and Optimization Macro 
forecasting, optimization techniques, 
predictive analytics 
 
Solver, Analysis Toolkit, 
Regression, Scenario analysis 
6 
Jun 07 
TEST 1 
7 
Jun 14 
Financial Software Integration Use with 
Bloomberg and third-party software 
 
Using Bloomberg Terminals 
8 
Jun 21 
VBA / Programming I Intro to VBA / 
programming 
 
VBA, macros, custom functions 
9 
Jun 28 
VBA / Programming II Working with custom 
functions 
VBA, advanced loops 
10 
Jul 05 
VBA / Programming III Additional 
programming 
 
User interfaces, additional VBA 
programming 
11 
Jul 12 
FinTech Integration 
 
12 
Jul 19 
TEST 2 
 
13 
Jul 26 
GROUP PROJECT  
 
 
