 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIN 304: Introduction to Business Finance 
COURSE SYLLABUS: Summer II 2020 
 
INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION 
 
Instructor: Dr. Ramya R. Aroul  
 
Office Hours and Communication: 
 
Office Hours: By appointment 
University Email Address: ramya.aroul@tamuc.edu 
 
COURSE INFORMATION 
Materials – Textbooks, Readings, Supplementary Readings 
1. 
Required Textbook: Fundamentals of Financial Management, Concise edition, 
9th Edition; Brigham and Houston, South-Western, 2015, ISBN: 978-1-305-63593-7 
 
2. 
Required Calculator: A financial calculator is required for this course. Texas 
Instruments BA II Plus is recommended, since I will be teaching by using that model   
HP 10-B or equivalent calculators could be used, but students are held accountable on 
learning how to master them. Financial, non-storing calculators will be the only ones 
allowed in the exams. Calculators must manipulate irregular cash flows. A financial 
calculator will be advantageous to have not only when you take other business classes, 
but also when making personal financial decisions throughout your lifetime. 
 
3. Access to a Computer with the latest version of Microsoft Excel. 
Course Description 
Basic concepts of business finance with emphasis on global and ethical issues, total 
quality management, production of goods and services, and various laws and 
regulations that affect the financial environment in which the firm operates. Basic 
elements of business finance, the financial environment, financial institutions, security 
markets, interest rates, taxes, risk analysis, time value of money and valuation. 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
Maximizing value of the firm using financial analysis and planning, working capital 
management, cost of capital and capital budgeting.  
 
Prerequisites: Acct 222; ECO 2301, 2302, MATH 1325. 
Student Learning Outcomes  
All of the topics covered in the course are covered with a specific course objective in 
mind. The course objectives for this course are given below which will be created into a 
learning outcomes assessment rubric (given below the objectives) to measure student 
performance in the class. The objectives for this course are:  
 
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the fundamental concepts of corporate finance and 
its principles and methods.  
2. Understand and apply valuation techniques of securities, projects and corporations.  
3. Demonstrate an understanding and show ability to measure financial decisions in a 
risk/return environment. 
 
Criteria (Course 
Objectives)  
1 (Unsatisfactory)  
2 (Emerging)  
3 (Proficient)  
4 (Exemplary)  
Demonstrate an 
understanding of the 
fundamental 
concepts of 
corporate finance 
and its principles 
and methods.  
Student cannot 
demonstrate an 
understanding any 
of the fundamental 
concepts of 
corporate finance 
and its principles 
and methods.  
Student can 
demonstrate some 
understanding of the 
fundamental 
concepts of 
corporate finance 
and its principles 
and methods.  
Student can 
demonstrate 
understanding of all 
of the fundamental 
concepts of 
corporate finance 
and its principles 
and methods and 
analyze issues 
accordingly.  
Student can 
demonstrate 
understanding of all of 
the fundamental 
concepts of corporate 
finance and its 
principles and methods 
and display an ability 
to analyze and 
synthesize 
accordingly.  
Understand and 
apply valuation 
techniques of 
securities, projects 
and corporations.  
Student cannot 
demonstrate an 
understanding of 
any valuation 
techniques of 
securities, projects 
and corporations.  
Student can 
demonstrate an 
understanding of 
valuation techniques 
but none of the 
application to the 
projects or 
corporations.  
Student can 
demonstrate an 
understanding of 
valuation techniques 
and all of the 
application to the 
projects or 
corporations and 
can analyze issues 
accordingly.  
Student can 
demonstrate an 
understanding of 
valuation techniques 
and all of the 
application to the 
projects or 
corporations and 
display an ability to 
analyze and synthesize 
accordingly.  
Demonstrate an 
understanding and 
show ability to 
measure financial 
decisions in a 
risk/return 
environment.  
Student cannot 
demonstrate an 
understanding of 
these processes or 
there measurement.  
Student can 
demonstrate an 
understanding of 
these processes but 
not the 
measurement.  
Student can 
demonstrate an 
understanding of 
these processes and 
there measurement 
and can analyze 
issues accordingly.  
Student can 
demonstrate an 
understanding of all of 
these processes and 
there measurement and 
display an ability to 
analyze and synthesize 
accordingly.  
 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
COURSE SCHEDULE 
 
Week 
Date 
Content 
Deadlines 
Class 1 
6-Jul Syllabus and Chapter 1 
  
Class 2 
8-Jul Chapter 3 
Class 3 
10-Jul Chapter 4 
  
Class 4 
10-Jul BONUS: Intro to Finance Test  4 Aug: Intro to Finance test due 
Class 5 
13-Jul Chapter 5 
  
Class 6 
15-Jul Chapter 5 
  
Class 7 
17-Jul EXAM 1 (Best 3 of 4 exams) 
 20 Jul: Exam 1 due 
Class 8 
20-Jul Chapter 5 
Class 9 
22-Jul EXAM 2 (Best 3 of 4 exams) 
 27 Jul: Exam 2 due 
Class 10 
24-Jul Chapter 7 
  
Class 11 
27-Jul Chapter 9 
Class 12 
27-Jul EXAM 3 (Best 3 of 4 exams) 
 3 Aug: Exam 3 due 
Class 13 
29-Jun Chapter 10 
  
Class 14 29-Jun EXAM 4 (Best 3 of 4 exams) 
 4 Aug: Exam 4 due 
 
GRADING 
 
Final grades in this course will be based on the following scale:  
 
A = 90%-100% 
B = 80%-89% 
C = 70%-79% 
D = 60%-69% 
F = 59% or Below 
 
No assignment or extra credit will be given to individual students to improve grades. 
Every grading component will be provided to all students.  
ASSESSMENTS 
 
Course Evaluation: 
Exam 1 
 
                    
33% 
Exam 2                      
         
33% 
Exam 3                      
         
33% 
Honesty Policy 
 
 
 
1% 
Bonus Quizzes 
                            5% 
Bonus: Intro to Finance Test                   10% 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
Exams 
There will be four exams in this course. The best three exam grades out of the four will 
count towards the student’s grade calculations. The lower grade on the four exams will 
be dropped. Because of this policy, make-up exams will not be administered under any 
circumstances. In the event of absence from more than one exam, you must contact me 
before the exam and upon documentation of the reason for absence by a medical doctor 
or TAMUC   official,   make-up exam may be permitted. Failing to do so will earn you a 
grade of zero on the exam. 
 
Practice Quizzes 
There will be many online practice quizzes administered on D2L throughout the course of 
the semester. Attempting a practice quiz will earn you 1 bonus point and you can earn up 
to a total of 5 bonus points that will be added directly to your course grade. The quiz 
questions will be objective-type questions. The quizzes will be timed and will be take-home 
online exams administered on D2L.  
 
Honesty Policy 
There is an honesty policy document that is uploaded on D2L. Students are expected to 
download the document, sign and scan it and upload the signed document on D2L before 
the census date. This constitutes 1 point towards the course grade. 
 
 
TECHNOLOGY REQUIREMENTS 
Browser support 
D2L is committed to performing key application testing when new browser versions are 
released. New and updated functionality is also tested against the latest version of 
supported browsers. However, due to the frequency of some browser releases, D2L 
cannot guarantee that each browser version will perform as expected. If you encounter 
any issues with any of the browser versions listed in the tables below, contact D2L 
Support, who will determine the best course of action for resolution. Reported issues 
are prioritized by supported browsers and then maintenance browsers. 
Supported browsers are the latest or most recent browser versions that are tested 
against new versions of D2L products. Customers can report problems and receive 
support for issues. For an optimal experience, D2L recommends using 
supported browsers with D2L products. 
Maintenance browsers are older browser versions that are not tested extensively 
against new versions of D2L products. Customers can still report problems and receive 
support for critical issues; however, D2L does not guarantee all issues will be 
addressed. A maintenance browser becomes officially unsupported after one year. 
Note the following: 
 
Ensure that your browser has JavaScript and Cookies enabled. 
 
For desktop systems, you must have Adobe Flash Player 10.1 or greater. 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
 
The Brightspace Support features are now optimized for production 
environments when using the Google Chrome browser, Apple Safari browser, 
Microsoft Edge browser, Microsoft Internet Explorer browser, and Mozilla 
Firefox browsers. 
Desktop Support 
Browser 
Supported Browser Version(s) Maintenance Browser Version(s) 
Microsoft® Edge 
Latest 
N/A 
Microsoft® 
Internet 
Explorer® 
N/A 
11 
Mozilla® 
Firefox® 
Latest, ESR 
N/A 
Google® 
Chrome™ 
Latest 
N/A 
Apple® Safari® 
Latest 
N/A 
Tablet and Mobile Support 
Device 
Operating 
System 
Browser 
Supported Browser Version(s) 
Android™ 
Android 4.4+ 
Chrome 
Latest 
Apple 
iOS® 
Safari, 
Chrome 
The current major version of 
iOS (the latest minor or point 
release of that major version) 
and the previous major version 
of iOS (the latest minor 
or point release of that major 
version). For example, as of 
June 7, 2017, D2Lsupports iOS 
10.3.2 and iOS 9.3.5, but not 
iOS 10.2.1, 9.0.2, or any other 
version. 
Chrome: Latest version for the 
iOS browser. 
Windows 
Windows 10 
Edge, 
Latest of all browsers, and 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
Device 
Operating 
System 
Browser 
Supported Browser Version(s) 
Chrome, 
Firefox 
Firefox ESR. 
 
• You will need regular access to a computer with a broadband Internet connection. 
The minimum computer requirements are: 
o 512 MB of RAM, 1 GB or more preferred 
o Broadband connection required courses are heavily video intensive 
o Video display capable of high-color 16-bit display 1024 x 768 or higher 
resolution 
 
• You must have a: 
o Sound card, which is usually integrated into your desktop or laptop 
computer  
o Speakers or headphones. 
o *For courses utilizing video-conferencing tools and/or an online proctoring 
solution, a webcam and microphone are required.  
 
• Both versions of Java (32 bit and 64 bit) must be installed and up to date on your 
machine. At a minimum Java 7, update 51, is required to support the learning 
management system.  The most current version of Java can be downloaded at: 
JAVA web site  http://www.java.com/en/download/manual.jsp 
 
• Current anti-virus software must be installed and kept up to date. 
 
 
Running the browser check will ensure your internet browser is supported. 
 
Pop-ups are allowed. 
 
JavaScript is enabled. 
 
Cookies are enabled. 
 
• You will need some additional free software (plug-ins) for enhanced web browsing. 
Ensure that you download the free versions of the following software: 
o Adobe Reader  https://get.adobe.com/reader/  
o Adobe Flash Player (version 17 or later) https://get.adobe.com/flashplayer/  
o Adobe Shockwave Player   https://get.adobe.com/shockwave/ 
o Apple Quick Time   http://www.apple.com/quicktime/download/ 
 
• At a minimum, you must have Microsoft Office 2013, 2010, 2007 or Open Office. 
Microsoft Office is the standard office productivity software utilized by faculty, 
students, and staff. Microsoft Word is the standard word processing software, 
Microsoft Excel is the standard spreadsheet software, and Microsoft PowerPoint is 
the standard presentation software. Copying and pasting, along with 
attaching/uploading documents for assignment submission, will also be required. If 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
you do not have Microsoft Office, you can check with the bookstore to see if they 
have any student copies. 
 
ACCESS AND NAVIGATION 
 
You will need your campus-wide ID (CWID) and password to log into the course. If you 
do not know your CWID or have forgotten your password, contact the Center for IT 
Excellence (CITE) at 903.468.6000 or helpdesk@tamuc.edu. 
 
Note: Personal computer and internet connection problems do not excuse the 
requirement to complete all course work in a timely and satisfactory manner. Each 
student needs to have a backup method to deal with these inevitable problems. These 
methods might include the availability of a backup PC at home or work, the temporary 
use of a computer at a friend's home, the local library, office service companies, 
Starbucks, a TAMUC campus open computer lab, etc. 
 
COMMUNICATION AND SUPPORT 
Brightspace Support 
Need Help? 
Student Support 
If you have any questions or are having difficulties with the course material, please 
contact your Instructor. 
Technical Support 
If you are having technical difficulty with any part of Brightspace, 
please contact Brightspace Technical Support at 1-877-325-7778 
or click on the Live Chat or click on the words “click here” to 
submit an issue via email. 
System Maintenance 
D2L runs monthly updates during the last week of the month, usually on Wednesday. 
The system should remain up during this time unless otherwise specified in an 
announcement. You may experience minimal impacts to performance and/or look and 
feel of the environment. 
Interaction with Instructor Statement 
 
*Email is the preferred method of communication. 
 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
COURSE AND UNIVERSITY PROCEDURES/POLICIES 
Syllabus Change Policy 
The syllabus is a guide.  Circumstances and events, such as student progress, may 
make it necessary for the instructor to modify the syllabus during the semester.  Any 
changes made to the syllabus will be announced in advance. 
 
University Specific Procedures 
Student Conduct 
All students enrolled at the University shall follow the tenets of common decency and 
acceptable behavior conducive to a positive learning environment.  The Code of 
Student Conduct is described in detail in the Student Guidebook. 
http://www.tamuc.edu/Admissions/oneStopShop/undergraduateAdmissions/studentGuidebook.as
px 
 
Students should also consult the Rules of Netiquette for more information regarding 
how to interact with students in an online forum: Netiquette 
http://www.albion.com/netiquette/corerules.html 
 
TAMUC Attendance 
For more information about the attendance policy please visit the Attendance webpage 
and Procedure 13.99.99.R0.01. 
http://www.tamuc.edu/admissions/registrar/generalInformation/attendance.aspx 
 
http://www.tamuc.edu/aboutUs/policiesProceduresStandardsStatements/rulesProcedur
es/13students/academic/13.99.99.R0.01.pdf 
 
Academic Integrity 
Students at Texas A&M University-Commerce are expected to maintain high standards 
of integrity and honesty in all of their scholastic work.  For more details and the 
definition of academic dishonesty see the following procedures: 
 
Undergraduate Academic Dishonesty 13.99.99.R0.03 
 
http://www.tamuc.edu/aboutUs/policiesProceduresStandardsStatements/rulesProcedur
es/13students/undergraduates/13.99.99.R0.03UndergraduateAcademicDishonesty.pdf 
 
Graduate Student Academic Dishonesty 13.99.99.R0.10 
 
http://www.tamuc.edu/aboutUs/policiesProceduresStandardsStatements/rulesProcedur
es/13students/graduate/13.99.99.R0.10GraduateStudentAcademicDishonesty.pdf 
 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
ADA Statement 
Students with Disabilities 
The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is a federal anti-discrimination statute that 
provides comprehensive civil rights protection for persons with disabilities. Among other 
things, this legislation requires that all students with disabilities be guaranteed a 
learning environment that provides for reasonable accommodation of their disabilities. If 
you have a disability requiring an accommodation, please contact: 
Office of Student Disability Resources and Services 
Texas A&M University-Commerce 
Gee Library- Room 162 
Phone (903) 886-5150 or (903) 886-5835 
Fax (903) 468-8148 
Email: studentdisabilityservices@tamuc.edu 
Website: Office of Student Disability Resources and Services 
http://www.tamuc.edu/campusLife/campusServices/studentDisabilityResourcesAndServ
ices/ 
Nondiscrimination Notice 
Texas A&M University-Commerce will comply in the classroom, and in online courses, 
with all federal and state laws prohibiting discrimination and related retaliation on the 
basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, age, genetic information or 
veteran status. Further, an environment free from discrimination on the basis of sexual 
orientation, gender identity, or gender expression will be maintained. 
Campus Concealed Carry Statement 
 
 
Texas Senate Bill - 11 (Government Code 411.2031, et al.) authorizes the carrying of a 
concealed handgun in Texas A&M University-Commerce buildings only by persons who 
have been issued and are in possession of a Texas License to Carry a Handgun. 
Qualified law enforcement officers or those who are otherwise authorized to carry a 
concealed handgun in the State of Texas are also permitted to do so. Pursuant to Penal 
Code (PC) 46.035 and A&M-Commerce Rule 34.06.02.R1, license holders may not 
carry a concealed handgun in restricted locations.  
 
For a list of locations, please refer to the Carrying Concealed Handguns On Campus  
document and/or consult your event organizer.   
 
Web url: 
http://www.tamuc.edu/aboutUs/policiesProceduresStandardsStatements/rulesProcedur
es/34SafetyOfEmployeesAndStudents/34.06.02.R1.pdf  
 
 
The syllabus/schedule are subject to change. 
 
Pursuant to PC 46.035, the open carrying of handguns is prohibited on all A&M-
Commerce campuses. Report violations to the University Police Department at 903-
886-5868 or 9-1-1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
