  
BAFI550  
  
1  
Program: MBA  
 
  
Syllabus  
COURSE INFORMATION  
Course title:  
Fundamental Finance  
Course code:  
BAFI 550  
Credits:  
1.5  
Session, term, period:   2021 W1 (Nov-Dec)  
Class location:  
HA 133  
Section(s):  
001  
Class times:  
M/W8:00-10:00 
Course duration:            Nov 1 – Dec 13, 2021 
Pre-requisites:  None  
Division:  
Finance  
Co-requisites:  
None  
Program:  
MBA  
 
INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION  
Instructor:  
Professor Glen Donaldson          Office Location:  HA881 and Online       
Phone:  
604-822-8344  
Office hours:  
By appointment   
Email:  
glen.donaldson@sauder.ubc.ca  
 
COURSE FORMAT  
Classes consist primarily of lectures and discussions in which students are expected to participate. 
Students are also expected to work though applied problems both in and outside of class, keep a daily 
journal of independent learning and course participation, and complete a group project involving 
applied finance research and analysis.  
COURSE DESCRIPTION  
This course investigates fundamental topics in finance, including:   
• 
financial managers, financial markets, and business formation and management   
• 
the time value of money, financial valuation, and investment decisions   
• 
methods of business financing and concepts in capital budgeting and capital structure   
• 
the valuation of financial instruments including stocks and bonds  
• 
the nature of risk and return in investments, diversification and trade-offs between risk and return  
• 
insurance, derivatives (options, futures, swaps), and risk management fundamentals  
• 
roles of financial institutions, including banks  
• 
the financial lifecycle, including venture capital, IPOs, mergers & acquisitions   
  
Frequently asked questions about taking BAFI 550 vs BAFI 500:   
  
1. Question: Should I take BAFI 500 or BAFI 550 as my first finance course?   
  
Answer: It depends on your objective. BAFI 550 (this course) is targeted at students who desire a 
fundamental understanding of a broad range of issues in finance and are not yet sure if they will 
take follow-on finance courses. This one course, BAFI 550, covers at a high level (broad but not as 
deep) roughly the sort of content that is typically covered at a much deeper and more technical 
level in the 3-course combination of: BAFI 500 (introductory finance), BAFI 502 (corporate finance) 
and BAFI 511 (investments); plus this course, BAFI 550, touches on some additional topics (e.g., in 
international finance, mergers & acquisitions, risk management, etc.). Students who desire a 
  
BAFI550  
  
2  
Program: MBA  
 
  
Syllabus  
deeper and more technical investigation, and who plan to specialize in finance, should consider 
taking all of: BAFI 500, BAFI 502 and BAFI 511 as their foundation rather than this single 
fundamental course BAFI 550.   
  
Historically, roughly 70% of the MBA class takes BAFI 550, and 30% takes BAFI 500, as their first 
finance course, although this varies from year-to-year.  
  
2. Question: If I take BAFI 550 (this course), rather than BAFI 500 as my first finance course, can I then 
take BAFI 502 (corporate finance) and BAFI 511 (investments) the following period?   
  
Answer: Yes, students who start with BAFI 550, rather than BAFI 500, and subsequently want to 
take BAFI 502 and BAFI 511 can do so, but may have to catch up on some technical details covered 
in BAFI 500 that may not be in BAFI 550.   
  
3. Question: What if I take BAFI 550, rather than all of the 3-courses BAFI 500/502/511, as my 
foundation, can I still take upper-level finance electives in Periods 3, 4, 6 and 7, such as International 
Finance, Mergers & Acquisitions, Venture Capital, and so forth?   
  
Answer: Yes, many upper-level finance courses require either BAFI 550 or some combination of 
BAFI 500/502/511 as the pre-requisite. If you do take BAFI 550, but not BAFI 502/511, you may 
need to catch up on some technical and/or topical details, especially for some of the more 
technically-oriented electives. Check with the MBA office for more information.      
     
LEARNING OBJECTIVES  
By the end of this course, students should be able to analyze, apply and explain fundamental issues, 
concepts and methods in finance.  
ASSESSMENTS  
Problem Set 1 (online problem set)  
10% 
Problem Set 2 (online problem set)  
10% 
Problem Set 3 (online problem set)  
10% 
Problem Set 4 (online problem set)  
10% 
Course Journal (learning and participation)  
10% 
Term Project (group research/analysis project)  
  50%  
Total  
100% 
 
LEARNING MATERIALS  
Textbook - REQUIRED:    
Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, Third Canadian Edition, by Jonathan Berk, Peter DeMarzo,  
Jarrad Harford, David Stangeland and Andras Marosi. Pearson Canada 2020  
 
Optional Additional Learning Resources – NOT REQUIRED but may be useful for some students:    
MyFinanceLab (access is acquired when purchasing the textbook) – contains practice problems.  
  
BAFI550  
  
3  
Program: MBA  
 
  
Syllabus  
MyFinanceLab Course ID: donaldson29305  
 
COURSE-SPECIFIC POLICIES AND RESOURCES  
Missed or late assignments, and regrading of assessments  
Late submissions, or missed exams/quizzes, will receive a grade of zero unless academic concession 
is granted (see below). Academic Concessions  
If extenuating circumstances arise, please contact the RHL Graduate School program office as early as 
reasonably possible, and submit an Academic Concession Request & Declaration Form 
https://webforms.sauder.ubc.ca/academic-concession-rhlee. If an academic concession is granted 
during the course, the student will be provided options by RHL, or by the instructor in consultation with 
RHL, per UBC’s policy on Academic Concession.  
POLICIES APPLICABLE TO COURSES IN THE ROBERT H. LEE GRADUATE SCHOOL   
Attendance  
Excepting extenuating circumstances, students are expected to attend 100% of their scheduled class 
hours. Absent students limit their own academic potential, and that of their classmates, and cause 
unnecessary disruption to the learning environment. Students missing more than 20% of the total 
scheduled class hours for a course (including classes held during the add/drop period) without having 
received an academic concession will be withdrawn from that course. Withdrawals, depending on 
timing, could result in a “W” or an “F” standing on the transcript.  
COVID-19 Policies for Attendance & Academic Concessions:  
If a student feels unwell, they should stay home and send a courtesy email to each impacted instructor 
and cc their program manager. The student should also submit an Academic Concession Request & 
Declaration Form.  
  
If a student suspects possible Covid-19 infection, they should use the BC Ministry of Health’s 
selfassessment tool, to help determine whether further assessment or testing for COVID-19 is 
recommended.  
  
If a student is required to self-isolate (e.g., while waiting for test results), they should follow the steps 
above (stay home, email instructor(s) and program manager, submit an Academic Concession Request & 
Declaration Form, and follow BC Health Guidance.  
  
Students who are required to quarantine, should get in touch with their Program Manager to discuss the 
possibility of academic concessions for each impacted course. The Program Manager will work closely 
with your instructors to explore options for you to make up the missed learning.  
COVID-19 Safety in the Classroom:   
Masks: Masks are required for all indoor classes, as per the BC Public Health Officer orders. For our 
inperson meetings in this class, it is important that all of us feel as comfortable as possible engaging in 
class activities while sharing an indoor space.  For the purposes of this order, the term “masks” refers to 
medical and non-medical masks that cover our noses and mouths.  Masks are a primary tool to make it 
harder for Covid-19 to find a new host.  You will need to wear a medical or non-medical mask for the 
  
BAFI550  
  
4  
Program: MBA  
 
  
Syllabus  
duration of our class meetings, for your own protection, and the safety and comfort of everyone else in 
the class.  You may be asked to remove your mask briefly for an ID check for an exam, but otherwise, 
your mask should cover your nose and mouth. Please do not eat in class. If you need to drink 
water/coffee/tea/etc, please keep your mask on between sips. Students who need special 
accommodation are asked to discuss this with the program office.  
  
Seating in class: To reduce the risk of Covid transmission, please sit in a consistent area of the classroom 
each day.  This will minimize your contacts and will still allow for the pedagogical methods planned for 
this class to help your learning.     
  
Visit the following website for the most recent updates regarding Covid-19 protocol on 
campus:https://students.ubc.ca/campus-life/returning-to-campus  
  
Punctuality  
Students are expected to arrive for classes and activities on time and fully prepared to engage. Late 
arrivals may be refused entry at the discretion of the instructor or activity lead. Students arriving later 
than halfway through a scheduled class will be treated as absent for that class.  
  
Electronic Devices  
Devices such as laptops, tablets, and cell phones are not permitted to be used in class unless directed by 
the instructor for in-class activities. Students who do not follow the School’s policy in this regard may be 
required to leave the room for the remainder of the class, so that they do not distract others. Research 
shows that students’ use of laptops in class has negative implications for the learning environment, 
including reducing their own grades and the grades of those sitting around them.   
  
Citation Style  
Please use the American Psychological Association (APA) reference style to cite your sources.  
  
Details of the above policies and other RHL Policies are available at:  
http://www.calendar.ubc.ca/vancouver/index.cfm?tree=12,199,506,1625   
UNIVERSITY POLICIES AND RESOURCES  
UBC provides resources to support student learning and to maintain healthy lifestyles but recognizes 
that sometimes crises arise and so there are additional resources to access including those for survivors 
of sexual violence. UBC values respect for the person and ideas of all members of the academic 
community. Harassment and discrimination are not tolerated nor is suppression of academic freedom. 
UBC provides appropriate accommodation for students with disabilities and for religious observances. 
UBC values academic honesty and students are expected to acknowledge the ideas generated by others 
and to uphold the highest academic standards in all of their actions. Details of the policies and how to 
access support are available on the UBC Senate website at https://senate.ubc.ca/policies-
resourcessupport-student-success.  
  
Respect for Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion  
  
BAFI550  
  
5  
Program: MBA  
 
  
Syllabus  
The UBC Sauder School of Business strives to promote an intellectual community that is enhanced by 
diversity along various dimensions including status as a First Nation, Metis, Inuit, or Indigenous person, 
race, ethnicity, gender identity, sexual orientation, religion, political beliefs, social class, and/or 
disability. It is critical that students from diverse backgrounds and perspectives be valued in and 
wellserved by their courses. Furthermore, the diversity that students bring to the classroom should be 
viewed as a resource, benefit, and source of strength for your learning experience. It is expected that all 
students and members of our community conduct themselves with empathy and respect for others.   
  
Academic Integrity  
The academic enterprise is founded on honesty, civility, and integrity. As members of this enterprise, all 
students are expected to know, understand, and follow the codes of conduct regarding academic 
integrity. At the most basic level, this means submitting only original work done by you and 
acknowledging all sources of information or ideas and attributing them to others as required. This also 
means you should not cheat, copy, or mislead others about what is your work; nor should you help 
others to do the same. For example, it is prohibited to: share past assignments and answers with other 
students; work with other students on an assignment when an instructor has not expressly given 
permission; or spread information through word of mouth, social media, or other channels that subverts 
the fair evaluation of a class exercise, or assessment. Violations of academic integrity (i.e., misconduct) 
lead to the breakdown of the academic enterprise, and therefore serious consequences arise and harsh 
sanctions are imposed. For example, incidences of plagiarism or cheating may result in a mark of zero on 
the assignment or exam and more serious consequences may apply if the matter is referred to the 
President’s Advisory Committee on Student Discipline. Careful records are kept in order to monitor and 
prevent recurrences.   
  
Academic Freedom and Students Studying from Outside Canada  
Some UBC courses might cover topics that are censored or considered illegal by non-Canadian 
governments. This may include, but is not limited to, human rights, representative government, 
defamation, obscenity, gender or sexuality, and historical or current geopolitical controversies. If you 
are a student living abroad, you will be subject to the laws of your local jurisdiction, and your local 
authorities might limit your access to course material or take punitive action against you. UBC is strongly 
committed to academic freedom, but has no control over foreign authorities (please visit 
http://www.calendar.ubc.ca/vancouver/index.cfm?tree=3,33,86,0  for an articulation of the values of 
the University conveyed in the Senate Statement on Academic Freedom). Thus, we recognize that 
students will have legitimate reason to exercise caution in studying certain subjects. If you have 
concerns regarding your personal situation, consider postponing taking a course with manifest risks, 
until you are back on campus or reach out to your academic advisor to find substitute courses. For 
further information and support, please visit: http://academic.ubc.ca/support-resources/freedom-
expression  
 
 
COPYRIGHT  
  
BAFI550  
  
6  
Program: MBA  
 
  
Syllabus  
All materials of this course (course handouts, lecture slides, assessments, course readings, etc.) are the 
intellectual property of the instructor or licensed to be used in this course by the copyright owner. 
Redistribution of these materials by any means without permission of the copyright holder(s) 
constitutes a breach of copyright and may lead to academic discipline and could be subject to legal 
action. All lecture recordings are for the sole use of the instructor and students enrolled in the class. In 
no case may lecture recordings, or part of the recordings, be used by students for any other purpose, 
either personal or commercial. Further, audio or video recording of classes are not permitted without 
the prior consent of the instructor. Students may not share class Canvas or Zoom links or invite others 
who are not registered to view sessions or access material.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
UBC’s Point Grey Campus is located on the traditional, ancestral, and unceded territory of the 
xwməθkwəyəm (Musqueam) people, who for millennia have passed on their culture, history, and ̓ 
traditions from one generation to the next on this site.   
ONLINE TEACHING TOOL & REQUIREMENTS   
This course will be taught using Zoom for some office hours and potentially some classes. For this 
course, you are required to use a Zoom account during such times. If you do not have a Zoom account, 
you can create one here: https://zoom.us/signup. Note: creating a Zoom account requires that you 
provide a first name, last name, and email address to Zoom. For privacy purposes, you may consent to 
using your existing email address and your real name. Alternatively, if you prefer, you may sign up using 
an alternative email address and an anonymized name that does not identify you (i.e. Jane Doe, 
jane.doe@email.com). If you have trouble creating an account, or accessing a Zoom session, please 
contact CLCHelp@sauder.ubc.ca. You will be required to provide the email address associated with your 
Zoom account in a Canvas quiz for identification purposes. Students are expected to conduct themselves 
professionally by joining online sessions on time, muting mics when not speaking, refraining from using 
any other technology when in-session, attending in business casual attire (at a minimum), and 
participating from a quiet environment.  
COURSE SCHEDULE (SUBJECT TO CHANGE)  
Class   
Topics  
Readings /Activities  
Assessments   
Class 
1 
Nov 1  
introduction to finance and this course  
corporate finance, the firm and financial managers  
  
Ch 1, 2  
  
Class 
2 
Nov 3  
the time value of money and financial valuation 
investment decisions and capital budgeting tools  
Ch 3, 4  
Ch 8(1st half)  
PS 1: due 8am 
Nov 8  
Class 
3 
Nov 8  
debt financing, global bond markets and bond valuation  
interest rates, currency exchange rates  
Ch 6, 15   
Ch 5(half), 22(half)  
  
Class 
4 
Nov 10  
stocks markets, stock pricing, information in markets  
the nature of investment risk and return    
Ch 7  Ch 
10  
PS 2: due 8am 
Nov 15  
Class 
5 
Nov 15  
diversification and investment portfolios 
Beta, asset pricing and the CAPM  
Ch 11(1st half) Ch 
11(2nd half)  
  
Class 6   
Nov 17  
corporate capital structure, cost of capital WACC 
corporate finance decisions, insurance  
Ch 16, 12(1st half) Ch 
21(1st half)  
PS 3: due 8am 
Nov 22  
  
BAFI550  
  
7  
Program: MBA  
 
  
Syllabus  
Class 
7 
Nov 22  
derivatives - forwards, futures, swaps 
options and risk management  
Ch 21(2nd half) Ch 
13  
  
Class 
8 
Nov 24  
cash management and working capital 
financial institutions, banks, securitization   
Ch 19(half),20(half) 
Ch 1  
PS 4: due 8am 
Nov 29  
Class 
9 
Nov 29  
financial lifecycle: venture capital to IPO financial 
lifecycle: mergers & acquisitions to exit  
Ch 14  
Ch 24  
  
Class 10 
Dec 1  
corporate governance, risk, investment pitfalls 
(asynchronous)  
Ch 25  
  
  
Exam 
week  
Final Project – form a team, pick a company that recently 
experienced an IPO or M&A, analyze the company (Beta, 
capital structure, etc.) relative to its peers, and also 
analyze its IPO/M&A event  
no classes, final 
exam period  
Project and  
Journal due  
11:59pm   
Dec 10  
  
 
