COURSE SYLLABUS FL17    Principles of Finance 
BFN201 – 3 credit hours 
Online  
Professor: Sue Lugli  
Office Location: Wheaton Hall, Room 313 
Office Hours: Monday 1:30pm - 4:30pm, Wednesday 2:00pm - 
6:00pm,  Tuesday 1:00 pm – 3:00 pm and by appointment 
Office PHONE (860) 343-5840                          
Office e-mail: SLugli@mxcc.edu    
**The Professor reserves the right to change this syllabus at any time.**  
The course takes place on three different platforms. While this may be confusing, each 
week there are very detailed assignment and clear instructions on what site the work needs 
to be done. It is your responsibility to ask questions and seek help if you have a question 
about coursework. I will respond back ASAP.  The best/fastest way to reach me is via my 
email – slugli@mxcc.edu. The message system on blackboard is not the fastest way as I 
have to be on blackboard to see it. 
SCOPE OF COURSE: 3 Credit Hours 
This course provides basic principles involved in the process of making financial decisions. 
Topics include the time value of money, ratio analysis of financial statements, leverage, cash 
flow and working capital and the relationship of risk to return.  
Prerequisite: ECN101 & 102, ACC*115, ENG*101 and MAT*137, 
PROGRAM/DISCIPLINE LEARNING OUTCOMES CONTAINED IN COURSE 
In today’s competitive business environment, employers expect graduates to possess a certain 
skill set.  The goal of the Business Division is to incorporate the following outcomes from each 
course: 
 
Critical thinking, problem solving and analytical skills  
 
Current technological skills 
 
Interpersonal skills and awareness  
 
Teamwork, team-building and project focus 
 
Knowledge of ethical and legal business behavior 
 
The role of Managerial Finance in business environments and world 
economies 
 
The Financial Market Environment  
 
Taxation and Investing 
 
The concept of risk and return 
 
Personal productivity, financial and organizational skills  
IMPORTANCE OF COURSE IN PROGRAM/DISCIPLINE 
Finance (BFN 201) provides the student with the fundamentals to the principles of business 
finance, their application to organizations and their own personal money management. It is 
required of all business students.  Analytical financial decision-making skills are necessary in all 
functional departments of organizations. The knowledge, skills, and attitudes needed to 
effectively manage money are the same as those necessary in real life.  This course provides each 
student a firm business foundation and an opportunity to develop his/her own, unique philosophy 
and style of financial management. 
LEARNING OUTCOMES/OBJECTIVES: 
The goal of the Principles of Finance course is for each student to develop an understanding of 
the basic financial principles and practices in American businesses and the global market 
place.  Also, the course provides students with the opportunity to: 
 
Analyze principles, techniques and major functions of finance in business 
and organizations 
 
Work independently and with others of diverse backgrounds 
 
Demonstrate proficiencies in reading, writing, listening, presentation, 
spreadsheet application and decision making 
 
Rationalize and present solutions to problems using business knowledge 
and knowledge from other academic disciplines 
 
Develop a sound ethical, philosophical and moral skill set necessary to 
succeed in business 
Textbooks and other required readings/computer software/materials/library reserve room: 
Principles of Finance, brief, 7th edition, Gitman, Lawrence – Zutter, Chad J.  Pearson Higher Ed 
with access code 
This is the site information on where you will create your Investment portfolio for your 
Final Project - http://www.howthemarketworks.com/register/97054.  
Evaluation 
methods                                                                                                                  
Homework assignments                    10% 
Quizzes & 
Spreadsheets                   15%                                                                             
Discussions                                         15% 
3 Tests                                               45% 
Portfolio Project                                  15%____ 
                                                             100% 
Final Grades will be determined by applying the percentages listed above to the graded 
work submitted to meet course requirements. Use the Blackboard grade book to review 
your grades. Assignments that are required to be submitted through the course Blackboard 
must be in the proper format for the given assignment. Late Assignments are assessed a 
penalty. I do not accept emailed assignments. 
Grade Scale  
A = 93-100 
A - = 90-92.49 
B+ = 87-89.49 
B = 83 -86.49 
C+ = 77-79.49 
C = 73 - 76.49 
C- = 70-72.49 
D+ = 67 - 69.49 
D = 63 - 66.49 
D- = 61 - 62.49 
F = 60 and below 
Course Requirements 
Effort and Attitude – The entire class is based on the principles of a strong work ethic and a 
positive attitude.  
Teaching Procedures: 
The instructor will use a combination of discussions, case studies, and lectures/video to cover the 
instructional objectives and topics. There will be group work and full participation is expected. 
Assignments will be reviewed for content and clarity. Criteria for grading will be openly 
discussed and rubrics will be online for your review and to download. Coursework will not be 
accepted after the due date without written consent prior to the due date.  Students must complete 
all coursework even with an excused absence. Students are responsible for getting missed notes 
from other students. Assignments will be posted on the course Blackboard site in advance. 
COLLEGE POLICY 
All policies are presented in the College Catalog. 
Class Cancellation 
In the event that the instructor cannot meet the class, every attempt will be made to inform students 
in advance.  In the event of inclement weather, please refer to the radio or TV for announcements or 
call the college telephone number 860-343-5888.  If you are outside the direct dialing area, call 1-
800-818-5501. 
IMPORTANT COLLEGE POLICIES!!  PLEASE READ CAREFULLY!  
For information about the college's policies and procedures regarding academic honesty, 
accessibility/disability services, attendance, audio-recording in the classroom, grade appeals, 
plagiarism, religious accommodations, weather and emergency closings, and more, please go to 
the following website: www.mxcc.edu/catalog/syllabus-policies/ or scan the QR code with your 
smart phone. Also, please become familiar with the policies regarding nondiscrimination, sexual 
misconduct, and general student conduct at the following 
website:  www.mxcc.edu/nondiscrimination/.   
NON-DISCRIMINATION STATEMENT 
Middlesex Community College does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religious creed, 
age, sex, national origin, marital status, ancestry, present or past history of mental disorder, 
learning disability or physical disability, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression or 
genetic information in its programs and activities. In addition, the College does not discriminate 
in employment on the additional basis of veteran status or criminal record. 
 
The following people have been designated to handle inquiries or complaints regarding non-
discrimination policies and practices:  
 
Primary Title IX Coordinator 
Dr. Adrienne Maslin 
Dean of Students/Title IX and Section 504/ADA Coordinator 
amaslin@mxcc.edu; 860-343-5759; Founders Hall Room 123| 
Expected Course Conduct 
All resources and facilities of Middlesex Community College, including the computer classroom 
sites, are to be used solely for legitimate and authorized academic purposes. Any unauthorized or 
illegitimate use of the computer systems, resources, and/or facilities will be subject to 
disciplinary action. 
Students Responsibilities to the Course 
 
You will be responsible to prepare for each class session (all readings complete and 
assignments done)  
 
You will be responsible to prepare for the exams 
 
You will be expected to treat each other and the instructor with respect  
 
You will be expected to conduct yourself in an appropriate manner while you are in 
attendance in this course  
 
You will be responsible for the reasonable care of the computer equipment used in 
conjunction with this course 
 
Topical Outline 
  
Week 1 – Investing 101,  Howthemarketworks.com, Homework, Quizzes, 
Discussion Board (DB) 
Week 2 – Using Excel for Financial Reporting and Analysis, Homework, Quizzes & 
Spreadsheet Assignment, DB 
Week 3 – Chapter 1, Homework, Quiz & Spreadsheet Assignment, DB, Portfolio 
Management (PM) 
Week 4 – Chapter 2, Homework, Quiz, Discussion Board (DB), Portfolio 
Management review Assignment 
Week 5 – Chapter 3 Pages 53-70, Homework, Quiz, Spreadsheet assignment,  
Week 6 – Chapter 3 Pages 70-106, First test chapters 1 -3 
Week 7 – Chapter 4, Homework, Spreadsheet Assign, Discussion Board (DB), 
Portfolio Management  
Week 8 – Chapter 5 pages 153 - 172, Homework, Spreadsheet Assign, (DB), Portfolio 
Management  
Week 9 – Chapter 5 pages 172 - 209, Homework, Quiz, (DB),  
Week 10 – Chapter 6 Homework, Quiz, (DB), Portfolio Management 
(PM)review Assignment  
Week 11– Chapter 7, Second test Chapters 4 – 7 
Week 12 – Chapter 8, Homework, Spreadsheet Assignment, Discussion Board 
(DB), Portfolio Management (PM) 
Week 13 – Chapter 9, Homework, Quiz, No Discussion this week it's Thanksgiving 
Week 14 – Chapter 10, Homework,  Discussion Board (DB), Portfolio Management 
(PM) 
Week 15 – Analysis, Review and Third Test 
Week 16 – Investment Portfolio Project paper due 12/12/17  
 
