WINTER 2023 BUS 290 – 003 COURSE 
1 | P a g e
 
 
BUS 290 – 003 │ Introduction to Finance 
 Winter 2022 Course Outline 
Hill School of 
We advance engagement in business and diverse communities through interdisciplinary thinking 
Business’ Mission 
and research, experiential learning, and critical reflection for personal and professional fulfillment. 
 
 
CLASS TIME 
7:00 p.m. – 9:45 p.m. / Wednesdays / Jan 4 – Apr. 5, 2023 
CLASS LOCATION 
ED 616 (hyflex: in-person and remote delivery) 
REMOTE ACCESS 
If outside Regina area or off campus, a Zoom link will be posted. 
COURSE SITE 
http://www.uregina.ca/urcourses/ - access through your UR account 
 
INSTRUCTOR 
Dave Roszell 
EMAIL 
David.Roszell@uregina.ca 
OFFICE 
ED 524.5 (Sessional Lecturer’s Office) 
OFFICE HOURS 
Flexible, by appointment only. 
 
LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
The University of Regina is situated on Treaty 4 lands with a presence in Treaty 6. These are the 
territories of the Nêhiyawak, Anihšināpēk, Dakota, Lakota, and Nakoda, and the homeland of the 
Métis/Michif Nation.  Today, these lands continue to be the shared territory of many diverse peoples 
from near and far. 
 
COURSE SUMMARY AND OBJECTIVES 
 
The course objective is to introduce students to basic finance concepts including financial markets, 
accounting statements and cash flows, the time value of money, net present value, securities valuation, 
capital budgeting, and risk/return analysis.  It is a foundational course so you will be learning the tools to 
do analysis in other course offerings. 
 
TEXTBOOK: 
 
Corporate Finance, 2022, 9th Canadian edition, by Ross, Westerfield, Jaffe, and Driss published by 
McGraw-Hill Ryerson 
 
You may also consider an electronic edition at the following URL: 
 
https://www.mheducation.ca/corporate-finance-9781260881370-can-group 
 
Access to the text publisher’s resources will be available if you buy a text. 
 
Note: Not having access to required resources (like a textbook) is not a valid reason for extensions, grade 
adjustments, or other accommodations. When students fail, a common reason is not having the textbook 
and we make extensive use of the book in this course. They are expensive, but for a relatively minor 
investment in the textbook, consider it to be insurance to reduce the chance that you could lose the 
money invested in the class!
This Course Outline is subject to change. Please refer to the current version on UR Courses. 
WINTER 2023 BUS 290 – 003 COURSE 
2 | P a g e
 
 
 
 
COURSE EXPECTATIONS 
 
The course will use lectures, chapter exercises, discussions, problem sets, online resources, and 
extra reading.  Every student is expected to be prepared for each class. Check the class website 
before every class. Please be familiar with this Course Outline. 
 
 
Class Delivery The class will be delivered in both in-person and remote formats. You will be 
required to select which format you will use. Remote exams will use 
ProctorTrack software. If you attend remotely, you must have your audio on at 
all times. 
 
UR Courses 
Website contains all course materials, class tools, pre-recorded video, and PowerPoints. 
The video / slides are not substitutes for a textbook; a textbook is required. 
 
Technical 
Contact IT Support for any technical assistance (IT.Support@uregina.ca or  
Support 
306.585.4685).  Online assistance at https://www.uregina.ca/remote-learning/technical.html 
 
Contacting 
Students are encouraged to contact the instructor for assistance. Email is preferred; use 
Instructor 
your university email address as external emails (e.g., Hotmail.com) may not get through. 
 
Attendance 
 Students are expected to attend all classes. Students must complete 
a minimum amount of course work to be in good standing and to be eligible to 
write the final exam. 
 
Any student who is experiencing COVID-19 symptoms and/or has tested positive for COVID-19 (and 
must, therefore, not come to campus), should contact the instructor as soon as possible to discuss 
potential accommodations. A student who is unable to attend an on-campus midterm exam for these 
reasons should submit a student self-declaration of illness form to the instructor, and we will discuss the 
potential for a deferred exam or adjusted exam weightings. If the exam is a final exam, the student self-
declaration of illness form, together with a deferred exam application, should be submitted to 
Hill.Undergrad@uregina.ca. 
 
Due to privacy concerns, the class will not be recorded and you may not record any portion of class. 
 
LEARNING APPROACH 
 
The class website is set up in the format of READ, REFLECT, and DO. Read what is required, then 
reflect on learning with questions asked. Finally, you will apply learning through an assigned task or 
exercise.  
 
Pre-requisite material: Be familiar with basic concepts in accounting, statistics, mathematics and basic 
knowledge in Excel/business calculators. We use Excel/business calculators to do complicated financial 
calculations, e.g., finding the present value, and yield to maturity.  It is your responsibility to be familiar 
with these background materials since I will not use the class time to review those materials 
 
 
WINTER 2023 BUS 290 – 003 COURSE 
3 | P a g e
 
 
 
 
BEING SUCCESSFUL IN THIS COURSE 
 
In university, you have less in-class time with instructors, your marks are often (initially) lower than 
high school, and class work is done on your own time and initiative. Past 100 students helped create 
a “Top 10” list: 
 
1. 
Attend all classes. Remember: You can only miss a maximum of five classes. 
2. 
Read textbook / e-book and assigned readings / course notes before class. 
3. 
Ask for help to clarify, if you don’t understand. Don’t wait until just before an exam or assignment. 
4. 
Study at a fixed time weekly time (e.g., Mondays from 8 -10 a.m.) in a consistent location. 
5. 
Take Your Own Notes during class, adding examples and class discussion points to your course 
notes. 
6. 
Stay Positive. Don’t be discouraged by a bad mark, if that happens. Ask how to do better. 
7. 
Participate in class – ask/answer questions, make comments, and learn from the discussion in 
class. 
8. 
Do the Extra Work to stay ahead on assignments and studying. Schedule time lines in your 
calendar. 
9. 
Stay Focused by not being distracted by your mobile phone, social media, etc.; your attention is on 
class. 
10. Have Fun or why are you doing this? 
 
Your goal is not passing this class – it should be to do well in class. BUS 290 is a foundational 
class where you master new vocabulary and gain new skills. You have competition for jobs so you 
need to stand out – in your marks, in your work and other experience, and in your attitude and skills. 
 
You should spend at least 7 hours but ideally 10 hours each week on this class, plus time on 
working on assignments and studying for exams.  
 
SUPPORT SERVICES – RESEARCH, STUDYING & WRITING 
 
The University of Regina wishes to support all students in achieving academic success while enjoying a 
full and rewarding university experience. 
 
Student Accessibility upholds the University's commitment to a diverse and inclusive learning environment 
by providing services and supports for students based on disability, religion, family status, and gender 
identity. Students who require these services are encouraged to contact Student Accessibility to discuss 
the possibility of academic accommodations and other supports as early as possible. For further 
information, please email accessibility@uregina.ca or call (306) 585-4491. 
 
 
Each business student may access a faculty academic program advisor, who is a great resource if you 
have any academic issues or questions. Other U of R services provided are: 
 
The Student Success Centre provides confidential guidance and support to students. 
Counselling services are also available for students experiencing anxiety, depression, other 
mental health-related issues, or chronic pain. Please visit 
https://www.uregina.ca/student/counselling/.Mental Health Wellness Hub. 
https://www.uregina.ca/mental-wellness/ 
WINTER 2023 BUS 290 – 003 COURSE 
4 | P a g e
 
 
 
 
The U of R Library staff are always glad to help to students with research and assignments. 
Our business librarian, Kate Cushon is available to provide advice on your projects.  
 
 
UR International provides free academic and non-academic assistance (e.g., English 
language services, cultural transition, and new learning environment adjustment) to 
international students. 
 
PREVENTION OF HARASSMENT POLICY 
 
The University of Regina promotes a learning, working, and living environment that is respectful and 
free of harassment and discrimination. The University will neither tolerate nor condone any 
inappropriate or irresponsible conduct including any behaviour, which creates an intimidating, hostile 
or offensive environment for study through the harassment of and /or discrimination towards an 
individual or group. The Respectful University Policy may be found at 
https://www.uregina.ca/policy/browse-policy/policy-GOV-100-015.html. 
 
If you have concerns about any conduct occurring in BUS 290, please discuss this with the Instructor. 
You may also review the Respectful University Policy Procedures (Revised 2017) at www.uregina.ca 
or contact Coordinator, Respectful University Services at (306) 585-5400 or respect@uregina.ca. 
 
ACADEMIC MISCONDUCT AND PLAGIARISM 
 
While you are encouraged to interact with and learn from other students in this class, you are expected 
to do your own work. Copying others’ work constitutes academic misconduct, and other examples of 
misconduct are: sharing answers during exams, talking during exams, signing other classmates in for 
attendance purposes, etc. 
 
Although we will not run into this much in this course, using someone else’s words as your own (i.e., 
plagiarism) includes omitting references, in-text citations, and quotation marks. Be sure you 
understand Student Code of Conduct and Right to Appeal, contained in the 2022- 23 Academic 
Calendar https://www.uregina.ca/student/registrar/resources-for-students/academic-calendars-and- 
schedule/undergraduate-calendar/index.html or ask your Instructor in advance about plagiarism or 
misconduct. 
 
If you are using someone's words or sharing their ideas, you must give them credit through proper 
citation or it will be considered plagiarism. In-text citations must be included for all information found 
through research. This includes anything that was your own previous knowledge or your own personal 
research and analysis. It must be cited along even if the information is paraphrased. You must cite 
ideas too, not just the words used. Do not purchase or access student assignments or similar 
information online. Even if cited, other students’ work may not be used in any course assignments. 
NOTE: ANY level of plagiarism in the form of ANY missing in-text citations and/or references will be 
referred to the Associate Dean – Undergraduate Program’s office for investigation of academic 
misconduct. Do not affect your academic career with plagiarism; cite correctly! 
 
 
 
WINTER 2023 BUS 290 – 003 COURSE 
5 | P a g e
 
 
 
ASSESSMENT SUMMARY 
 
You must complete the required course work to be eligible to write the final exam, AND you 
must have a passing mark on the three exams combined to pass the course, regardless of 
other class marks. Class attendance is required. Students that get less than 60% on the first 
assignments and first mid-term exam may be referred to the Student Success Centre and are 
encouraged to seek their assistance in improving the students’ academic performance. 
 
GRADING 
 
Students will be evaluated based on the following elements: 
 
DELIVERABLE 
WEIGHTING 
DUE DATE 
     Problem sets
15%
  Various
Mid-term Exam #1
  20%
Feb. 8
Mid-term Exam #2
  25%
Mar. 15
Final Exam  
 
  40% 
Apr. 26 
TOTAL 
   100% 
 
 
Grading Guideline: I go by the following guideline in the Academic Calendar: 
 
90-100: An outstanding performance 
80-89: Very good performance 
70-79: Above average performance 
60-69: A generally satisfactory and intellectually adequate performance  
50-59: A barely acceptable performance 
0-49: Unacceptable performance 
 
Participant Pool Research Credit: 
The Participant Pool provides business students with the opportunity to participate in faculty research 
studies to earn up to 2% bonus marks on participating business classes. These marks will be added 
to your final grade if you have: 1) passed the final exam and 2) passed the class, before using the 
bonus. For more information about the participant pool and to sign up, please visit 
https://www.uregina.ca/business and find Pool of Research Participants under Quick Links. Register 
using the first part of your U of R email as ID (e.g., for smith23k@uregina.ca, use smith23k as your 
User ID). 
 
DETAILED COURSE ASSESSMENT 
 
A. Problem Sets 
 
The problem sets are in addition to the chapter practice questions.  
 
I will drop the lowest mark of the problem sets other than the final one on the Capital Asset 
Pricing Model. This allows a even distribution of 5 marks each for the ones that count. 
WINTER 2023 BUS 290 – 003 COURSE 
6 | P a g e
 
 
 
 
If a student is ill for an extended time and cannot submit a PS, the weight for the missed problem 
set will move evenly to the remaining problem sets, subject to appropriate documentation and 
timely notice to the instructor, i.e., within three business days from the deadline of a PS. 
 
Note: All submissions are submitted through an Assignment link (on UR Courses) and 
must include your name in the file name and in the header of the assignment.  
 
The deadline for each problem set is by 11:00 pm on the assigned day.  
 
B. Midterms #1 and #2 
The first exam will be held on course material covered before the 1st midterm date. Please see 
the class schedule for the specific topics and chapters to be covered. The second term exam will 
cover course content from the start of the semester, but with approximately 75% or more 
weighted on content covered since the first midterm.  The reason there is content from the first 
third in the second midterm is calculations in the second third depend on things learned in the first 
third. 
 
C. Late Problem Sets and Missed Exams 
Late assignments are not accepted and there is no make-up assignment for any class 
assignments, if missed. A mark of 0% will be given. There are no make-up exams for missed mid-
term exams.  If there is a legitimate reason (e.g., illness but not vacation or work) that you could 
not write a midterm exam, the allocated marks will be added to the final exam 
 
D. Final Exam 
The final exam is comprehensive covering course content from the entire semester with a higher 
weighting to the last part of the semester. Note: You must achieve a passing grade across 
the midterms and the final exam to pass the course; failure to do that will earn a NP (not 
pass) on your course and will affect your grade point average. 
 
If you cannot write the final exam for medical or other legitimate reasons, your final exam may be 
deferred. However, your Instructor cannot defer the final exam; please contact the Associate Dean – 
Undergraduate Programs for deferral permission at the aforementioned email address of 
Hill.Undergrad@uregina.ca. 
 
Exam Resources 
 
Cheat sheet: You are allowed to bring a cheat sheet to all exams under the following conditions: 22 cm x 
14 cm (1/2 of letter size paper), one side only, and hand-written only. You can write anything you want, 
but NO formula sheet will be provided. 
 
Calculators: Standard business calculators will be allowed on exams as Excel will not be available.  
Examples are the Texas Instruments BAII+ or the Sharp EL738XTB.  Make sure that whatever one you 
have has the time value of money functions PV, FV, N, I/Y, PMT. 
 
 
 
 
WINTER 2023 BUS 290 – 003 COURSE 
7 | P a g e
 
 
 
CLASS SCHEDULE 
The following schedule is subject to change: 
 
CLASS
DATE
CLASS TOPIC
READING
1 
Jan. 4 
Overview and Introduction 
Ch. 1  
2 
Jan. 11 
Accounting Statements and Cash Flows
Ch 2 
3 
Jan. 18 
Time Value of Money (TVM) (part 1)
Ch. 5 
4 
Jan. 25 
Time Value of Money (part 2) 
Ch 5 
Due
Jan. 31
Problem Set # 1 Time Value of Money – Due before 11:00 p.m.
5
Feb. 1
How to Value Stocks and Bonds
Ch 6
6 
Feb. 8 
1st Mid-term (written in class time) – all content to-date
 
7 
Feb. 15 
Other Investment Rules
Ch 7 
Due
Feb. 17
Problem Set # 2 – Stocks and Bonds – Due before 11:00 p.m.
 
 
Feb. 22 
No Class – Reading Week 
 
8 
Mar. 1 
Capital Budgeting (part 1)
Ch 8 
9 
Mar. 8 
Capital Budgeting (part 2)
Ch 8 
Due 
Mar. 10
Problem Set # 3 – Capital Budgeting – Due before 11:00 p.m.
 
10 
Mar. 15 
2nd Mid-term (written in class time) – items 7 to 9 primarily
 
11 
Mar. 22 
Risk and Return Lessons from History
Ch 10 
12
Mar. 29
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) (part 1)
Ch. 11
13
Apr. 5
Capital Asset Pricing Model (part 2)
Ch. 11 
Due
Apr. .10
Problem Set # 4 – CAPM – Due before 11:00 p.m.
 
Apr. 26
Final Exam – Wednesday, Apr. 26 – 7:00 – 10:00 p.m.
 
Suggested Chapter Practice Questions
 
 
Ch 2 
4, 7-9, 17, 19, 20 
 
 
Ch 5 
1-5, 6, 8, 10a, 15-17, 20, 23, 25, 27, 30-31, 36-37, 44, 47, 52, 64, 66-68 
 
 
 Ch 6 
4, 5, 9, 16, 18-20, 22, 24, 27, 34, 37, 38, 41-45, 47, 50 
 
Ch 7
1, 2, 6, 7, 10, 13, 16, 17, 19, 23-27
 
Ch 8
1, 2, 4, 5, 9, 12, 16, 18, 20, 22, 23
 
 
 Ch 10* 
1-3, 5, 7-10, 13-15, 17 
 
 
 Ch 11 
4-6, 10, 12, 14, 17, 18, 21-25, 26-33, 35, 36 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
Q9 add par value of the zero-coupon bond is $1,000 
 
 
* 
Q10 add par value of the preferred stock is $100 
 
 
* 
Q17 assume that the inflation rate was 3.2% annually 
 
 
