 
 
 
CARLETON UNIVERSITY 
FINANCE 
BUSI 2501  
FALL 2023 
BUSINESS FINANCE 
 
 
Course Professor:      Harika Tuzcuoglu 
 
 
Office:  Online 
Email: 
               harikatuzcuoglu@carleton.ca  
Modality:  
In person, not suitable for online students. 
 
Course Meets: 
Section A: 
   Thursday 
         2:35 pm – 5:25 pm 
      Tory Building, Room 240 
Tutorials: 
   Monday                10:35 am – 11:25 pm            Nideyinàn (former UC),  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Room 282 
 
 
 
Faculty Office Hours:             Thursday, 1 pm – 2 pm 
TA Office Hours: 
 
TBD 
 
Pre-requisites & precluded Courses: 
BUSI 1005, and ECON 1001 and ECON 1002 (or ECOR 3800). Restricted to selected 
Sprott programs. Precludes additional credit for BUSI 2503, BUSI 2504 (no longer 
offered). The School of Business enforces all prerequisites. 
 
 
Course Calendar description from the 2023/2024 University calendar: 
Basic issues and practices in finance. Survey of business firms' financing, investment, and 
payout decisions. Emphasis on understanding the principles, resources, and trade-offs in 
the financial area of business. 
 
Course Description:  
This is an introductory course in finance. It addresses topics in finance that are important 
for all managers in organizations to understand. In addition to informing managers 
generally, these topics amount to an important foundation for higher level finance courses 
 
 
2 
and will be used extensively in those courses. Finally, some of the topics addressed in 
this course can help with personal financing and investment decisions. 
 
Learning Outcomes: 
The objective of this course for students to: 
• Understand the principles of time value of money and how to apply them. 
• Explain the features of various kinds of financial instruments, how to value them, 
and how organizations can use them to raise the capital they need. 
• Learn different approaches to evaluating investment opportunities and making 
investment decisions. 
• Identify measures of risk and how they are related to returns.  
• Develop general analytical skills in structuring and analyzing financial problems. 
 
Reading(s)/Textbook(s)/Required Materials: 
Ross, Westerfield, Jordan, Roberts, Pandes & Holloway Fundamentals of Corporate 
Finance,11th Canadian Edition, McGraw-Hill Ryerson, 2022. 
Check our bookstore/online platforms. 
 
Course Requirements & Methods of Evaluation: 
 
 
Weighting (%) 
 
Class Attendance 
5% 
In-class Activities 
    5% 
Quizzes (2)  
10% 
Midterm Exam 
30% 
Final Exam 
50% 
 
Bonus Assignments: 
FinTech/Sustainability Presentation 
2% 
 
 
The Midterm Exam will be held during class time on October 19th. It covers Chapters 1, 
5, 6, 7 and 8. A student who does not write the midterm exam will automatically receive a 
grade of zero unless this is due to a medical or otherwise emergency with the appropriate 
documentation. Make-up exam for students with emergencies, will take place on Monday 
October 31st. Please note that no other times for make-up midterm will be offered.  
 
The Final Exam will be a comprehensive test, covering material from the entire course. 
More information about the final exam will be provided in class as the term progresses. 
 
*A formula sheet will be provided to students prior to the midterm and final exam. 
Students are allowed to bring financial calculators to the exams. Students cannot use phone 
calculators or calculator applications; they need to have a physical calculator. 
 
Quizzes will be held during the class time. Quiz 1 (September 28th) covers Chapters 5 and 
6. Quiz 2 (November 23rd) covers Chapter 13. The lowest mark will be dropped; hence 
your best quiz will be counted as 10%. A student who does not write the quiz will 
automatically receive a grade of zero for that quiz. 
 
 
3 
The attendance is based on attending weekly classes. Partial marks will also be given for 
the number of classes attended.  
In-class activities will compromise several in-class group activities. This component takes 
place entirely in-class. 
FinTech/ Sustainability Presentation: This is a chance to earn up to an extra 2% bonus 
on the course if you choose to participate. The format will be a 15-minute PowerPoint 
presentation that you deliver in groups of 4-5 students. You will record your presentation 
and upload it to Brightspace - Mediaspace. You can form your own group and choose 
your own topic under the theme of FinTech, sustainability and emerging topics in 
finance. There will be a sign-up sheet and topics will go a on a first-come-first-served 
basis. This is your chance to have fun while teaching your classmates something new! 
Sample topic ideas include, but are not limited to:  
• 
Cryptocurrencies (Blockchains, Initial Coin Offerings, Illegal transactions, etc.)  
• 
Peer to peer lending  
• 
Robo advising 
• 
Crowdfunding and crowd-financing  
• 
High-frequency and algorithmic trading  
• 
Social media and financial blogs  
• 
Fake news in financial markets  
• 
Artificial Intelligence (A.I) applications in finance  
• 
FinTech revolution in emerging economies (social and economic impact of 
FinTech)  
• 
Green bonds 
• 
Sustainability practices in finance (ESG factors) 
• 
Another topic of your choice!  
There will be tutorials for this course on Mondays, from 10:35 am to 11:25 am. The TA 
will solve suggested questions and answer students’ questions. The attendance is highly 
recommended as tutorials will help you understand the material more and contribute to 
your success on quizzes and exams.  
 
Suggested End-of-Chapter Questions 
 
Chapter 5:      2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 13, 17, 19, 20 
Chapter 6: 
6, 7, 8, 11, 15, 16, 21, 25, 26, 44, 49, 55  
Chapter 7: 
3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 19, 20, 23  
Chapter 8:  
4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 16, 21 
Chapter 9: 
1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 14, 15, 17 
Chapter 12: 1, 2, 3, 7  
Chapter 13: 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 25 
Chapter 14:  3, 7, 8, 9,10, 15, 16 
 
 
Student Responsibilities 
 
 
4 
 
Students are responsible for reading each chapter listed in the course outline and knowing 
the material in those chapters whether specific mention of certain topics is made in class 
and regardless of whether topics are addressed in class. Because of time constraints, it is 
not possible to cover all the chapter material in class. Class time will be spent on the most 
important topics and on the topics from which students receive the most benefit from 
explanation in class. 
 
Doing well in this course 
1. Read the indicated chapter before class in which it is to be addressed; 
2. Do the self-test questions in the chapter immediately after you read it; 
3. Use the critical thinking questions at the end of each chapter to help you put 
concepts into your own words; this will help you develop a level of comfort with 
the material. 
4. Use class time to ask questions about things that were not clear to you from reading 
the chapter; 
5. Do the listed problems before the relevant tutorial; 
6. Attend the tutorials to see how the problems identified in bold can be solved and to 
ask questions about issues you may have with the other problems or with other 
course material; 
7. While solutions to the end-of-chapter problems will be provided at the beginning 
of the course, attempt problems before looking at their solutions; looking at the 
solution first leads to under-estimation of a problem’s difficulty and over-
estimation of your ability to solve it; 
8. Experiment with examples presented in class using your calculator and 
spreadsheets to develop your understanding of how the calculations and solution 
approaches work; re-doing a class example, and re-working an example with 
different values can significantly improve your understanding or un-cover things 
you are not understanding; 
9. Work at the course throughout the term, practice as you go along, and deal with 
things you don’t understand as they arise; it is difficult to be successful with the 
kind of material covered in this course by cramming before the term test or exam; 
10. Think about ideas addressed in the course outside of class, for example, when 
reading the newspaper or watching the news on television; question whether what 
you are seeing or hearing makes sense in light of your knowledge of the course 
concepts? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Course Schedule (tentative and subject to changes): 
Section A 
Date 
Topics 
Chapters 
Sep   7 
Overview of Corporate Finance 
1 
        14 
Time Value of Money 
5 
        21 
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation  
 
Chapter 6 
(Excl 6A) 
        28 
Interest Rates and Bond Valuation  
Quiz 1 (Ch. 5, 6) 
7 (excl. 7A) 
Oct   5 
Stock Valuation  
8 
        12 
Net Present Value and Other Investment Criteria 
 
        19    Midterm Test I (Ch. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8) 
9 
Winter Break, No Classes 
Nov  2 
Lessons from Capital Market History  
12 
         9     Return and Risk 
13 
        16 
Return and Risk (continued) 
13 
        23 
Cost of Capital  
Quiz 2 (Ch. 13) 
14 
        30 
Introduction to International Finance 
21 
Dec   7 
Introduction to FinTech 
 
 
*The best quiz will be counted as 10%. 
*In-class activities will take place throughout the semester. 
 
 
 
 
6 
Contribution to Learning Goals of the Program (BCom, BIB): 
 
Program Learning 
Goal 
Competencies Not 
Covered 
Competencies 
Introduced (only) 
Competencies Taught 
But Not Assessed 
Competencies 
Taught and Assessed 
 
CHECK (X) ONE PER ROW 
BC1 Knowledge 
Graduates will be 
skilled in applying 
foundational 
business knowledge 
to appropriate 
business contexts. 
 
 
 
X 
BC2 Collaboration 
Graduates will be 
collaborative and 
effective 
contributors in 
team environments 
that respect the 
experience, 
expertise and 
interest of all 
members. 
 
X 
 
 
BC3 Critical 
Thinking 
Graduates will be 
discerning critical 
thinkers, able to 
discuss different 
viewpoints, 
challenge biases 
and assumptions, 
and draw 
conclusions based 
on analysis and 
evaluation. 
 
 
X 
 
BC4 
Communication 
Graduates will be 
effective and 
persuasive in their 
communications. 
 
 
 
X 
BI5 Global 
Awareness (BIB 
ONLY) 
Graduates will be 
globally-minded. 
 
 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION  
 
Course Sharing Websites 
Materials created for this course (including presentations and posted notes, labs, case 
studies, assignments and exams) remain the intellectual property of the author(s). They 
are intended for personal use and may not be reproduced or redistributed without prior 
written consent of the author(s). 
 
Required calculator in BUSI course examinations  
If you are purchasing a calculator, we recommend any one of the following options: 
Texas Instruments BA II Plus (including Pro Model), Hewlett Packard HP 12C 
(including Platinum model), Staples Financial Calculator, Sharp EL-738C & Hewlett 
Packard HP 10bII 
 
Group work  
The Sprott School of Business encourages group assignments in the school for several 
reasons. They provide you with opportunities to develop and enhance interpersonal, 
communication, leadership, follower-ship and other group skills. Group assignments are 
also good for learning integrative skills for putting together a complex task. Your 
professor may assign one or more group tasks/assignments/projects in this course. Before 
embarking on a specific problem as a group, it is your responsibility to ensure that the 
problem is meant to be a group assignment and not an individual one.  
 
Grading 
In accordance with the Carleton University Undergraduate Calendar (p 34), the letter 
grades assigned in this course will have the following percentage equivalents: 
A+ = 90-100  
B+ = 77-79 
 
C+ = 67-69 
 
D+ = 57-59 
A   = 85-89 
 
B   = 73-76 
 
C   = 63-66 
 
D   = 53-56 
A - = 80-84 
 
B - = 70-72 
 
C - = 60-62 
 
D - = 50-52 
F    = Below 50        
 
Grades entered by Registrar: 
WDN = Withdrawn from the course 
DEF = Deferred  
 
Academic Regulations 
University rules regarding registration, withdrawal, appealing marks, and most anything 
else you might need to know can be found on the university’s website, here:  
http://calendar.carleton.ca/undergrad/regulations/academicregulationsoftheuniversity/ 
 
Requests for Academic Accommodation 
You may need special arrangements to meet your academic obligations during the term. 
For an accommodation request, the processes are as follows:  
 
Pregnancy Accommodation  
Please contact your instructor with any requests for academic accommodation during the 
first two weeks of class, or as soon as possible after the need for accommodation is 
 
 
8 
known to exist. For more details, visit the Equity Services website: 
carleton.ca/equity/wp-content/uploads/Student-Guide-to-Academic-
Accommodation.pdf 
 
Religious obligation 
Please contact your instructor with any requests for academic accommodation during the 
first two weeks of class, or as soon as possible after the need for accommodation is 
known to exist. For more details, visit the Equity Services website: 
carleton.ca/equity/wp-content/uploads/Student-Guide-to-Academic-
Accommodation.pdf 
 
Academic Accommodations for Students with Disabilities 
If you have a documented disability requiring academic accommodations in this course, 
please contact the Paul Menton Centre for Students with Disabilities (PMC) at 613-520-
6608 or pmc@carleton.ca for a formal evaluation or contact your PMC coordinator to 
send your instructor your Letter of Accommodation at the beginning of the term. You 
must also contact the PMC no later than two weeks before the first in-class scheduled test 
or exam requiring accommodation (if applicable). After requesting accommodation from 
PMC, meet with your instructor as soon as possible to ensure accommodation 
arrangements are made. carleton.ca/pmc 
 
Survivors of Sexual Violence 
As a community, Carleton University is committed to maintaining a positive learning, 
working and living environment where sexual violence will not be tolerated, and its 
survivors are supported through academic accommodations as per Carleton's Sexual 
Violence Policy. For more information about the services available at the university and 
to obtain information about sexual violence and/or support, visit: carleton.ca/sexual-
violence-support 
 
Accommodation for Student Activities  
Carleton University recognizes the substantial benefits, both to the individual student and 
for the university, that result from a student participating in activities beyond the 
classroom experience. Reasonable accommodation must be provided to students who 
compete or perform at the national or international level. Please contact your instructor 
with any requests for academic accommodation during the first two weeks of class, or as 
soon as possible after the need for accommodation is known to exist. 
https://carleton.ca/senate/wp-content/uploads/Accommodation-for-Student-
Activities-1.pdf 
 
For more information on academic accommodation, please contact the departmental 
administrator or visit: students.carleton.ca/course-outline 
 
 
Academic Integrity 
Violations of academic integrity are a serious academic offence. Violations of academic 
integrity – presenting another’s ideas, arguments, words or images as your own, using 
unauthorized material, misrepresentation, fabricating or misrepresenting research data, 
 
 
9 
unauthorized co-operation or collaboration or completing work for another student – 
weaken the quality of the degree and will not be tolerated.  
 
Process: If an alleged violation occurs, all relevant documentation will be forwarded to 
the Dean. If the allegation proves true, the penalties may include; a grade of Failure on 
the submitted work and/or course; academic probation; a refusal of permission to 
continue or to register in a specific degree program; suspension from full-time 
studies; suspension from all studies at Carleton; expulsion from Carleton, amongst others. 
For a first offence, at a minimum, the penalty assigned will normally be a zero on 
the submitted work and at least a minimum full grade reduction of the final course 
grade. For a second offence, at a minimum, the penalty assigned will normally lead 
to a suspension from studies. 
 
Students are expected to familiarize themselves with and follow the Carleton University 
Student Academic Integrity Policy which is available, along with resources for 
compliance at: https://carleton.ca/registrar/academic-integrity/. 
 
Sprott Student Services 
The Sprott Undergraduate Student Services Office offers program advising and overall 
student success support. Our team is available to discuss your academic goals and your 
program progression plans. We can also work with you to develop strategies for success, 
including study skills for Business. If you experience any difficulty this term or if you 
would like to access support, please contact our team at bcom@sprott.carleton.ca or 
at bib@sprott.carleton.ca. 
 
Centre for Student Academic Support 
The Centre for Student Academic Support (CSAS) is a centralized collection of learning 
support services designed to help students achieve their goals and improve their learning 
both inside and outside the classroom. CSAS offers academic assistance with course 
content, academic writing and skills development. Visit CSAS on the 4th floor of 
MacOdrum Library or online at: carleton.ca/csas. 
 
Important Information: 
- Students must always retain a copy of all work that is submitted. 
- All final grades are subject to the Dean’s approval. 
- For us to respond to your emails, we need to see your full name, CU ID, and the email 
must be written from your valid CARLETON address. Therefore, in order to respond to 
your inquiries, please send all email from your Carleton CMail account. If you do not 
have or have yet to activate this account, you may wish to do so by visiting 
https://carleton.ca/its/get-started/new-students-2/ 
  
 
