1 
Case Western Reserve University 
Weatherhead School of Management 
ACCT 100—Fundamentals of Accounting I 
Spring 2022 
 Section 100: MW 12:45-2 PBL 401 
Section 102: MW 3:20-4:35 PBL 258 
 
Professor:  
 
Melissa Carlisle, PhD, CPA 
Email: 
  
melissa.carlisle@case.edu (preferred method) 
Phone:  
 
216-368-3724 
Office:  
 
PBL 467 
Virtual Office Hours:  Tuesday and Thursday 11am-1pm via Zoom (Meeting ID: 910 
3949 3413 Passcode: 495964, 
https://cwru.zoom.us/j/91039493413?pwd=S0c2eTE1Qzk4ek9B
cmZTeGkvK0gyZz09) or by appointment. Face-to-Face meetings 
can be arranged by appointment as well.  
Course Website: 
 
canvas.case.edu 
Course description: 
Accounting is the language of business and this course exposes students to that language. 
This course introduces students to the basic principles, objectives, terminology, and role of 
financial, managerial, and tax accounting in business. This course is intended for both 
business and non-business majors.  This is the first required accounting course for all 
business majors. 
 
This course offers a high-level understanding and use of accounting concepts. The course 
introduces students to the basic principles, procedures, and objectives of financial and 
managerial accounting and brief overview of corporate tax concepts. The aim of the course is 
to help students better understand and interpret both the internal and external financial reports 
generated by a company’s accounting system. The course aims to assist students in speaking 
an accounting and business laden language without being intimidated. This is not a personal 
finance course.  
 
Prerequisites: 
None 
Required Materials: 
Textbook: Kimmel, Weygandt; Survey of Accounting, (2nd edition, Wiley), with WileyPlus 
NextGen web access. ISBN-13: 978-1-119-76778-7 
This course has been set up under the “First Day” program with the publisher meaning your course materials, 
including electronic textbook, will be digitally accessible through Canvas before the first day of class. You will 
be automatically enrolled in WileyPlus and charged for the textbook (I have heard it is about $105) on your 
student account. NO other purchase is necessary. To access the textbook, click on “Wiley Course Resources” 
on the left-hand side of the Canvas site. You will be asked to create a username and password (I suggest using 
your Case email). After creating your login you will be able to access the textbook. If you wish to obtain a 
hardcopy of the textbook, an optional loose-leaf print copy of the textbook is available to be ordered at the 
campus bookstore (I have heard it is less than $50). If you opt out of the “First Day” program, you will need to 
purchase WileyPlus (at a higher cost than “First Day”) and register with Wiley to be able to participate in this 
course. 
 
Technology tools:  
2 
 Basic calculator (not a phone or tablet) 
 Full familiarity with Canvas – assignments, announcements, grades, handouts, 
additional readings, and directions for projects will be posted on Canvas. 
 Microsoft Excel for project usage (Available at softwarecenter.case.edu) 
Department of Accountancy Undergraduate Learning Goals: 
1. Students possess information literacy regarding accounting principles, techniques, 
tools, and analysis. 
2. Students comprehend accountancy as a learned profession. 
3. Students communicate clearly. 
ACCT 100 Learning Objectives: 
At the end of this course, students will be able to: 
 Describe the role financial accounting plays in providing financial information to 
external users for their use in analyzing an organization’s activities. 
 Describe the role that managerial accounting plays in providing financial information 
to internal users to assist management with planning and control of operations.  
 Describe the objectives and structure of a sound tax system.  
 Define business terminology used in financial and managerial accounting 
 Determine how economic transactions effect the financial statements 
 Analyze public company financial statements  
 Demonstrate knowledge and fundamental accounting skills in the following areas: 
1. Financial Accounting:  Business organization, accounting equation, financial 
statements, internal controls 
2. Managerial Accounting: Cost concepts; Cost Volume, Profit analysis, decision 
making, budgeting, financial performance evaluation 
 
Course Policies 
Preparing for Class and Class Participation: It is essential that you be prepared for 
class. Adequate preparation includes reading assigned material, watching assigned tutorials, 
and attempting the pre-work. Class participation is a requirement and part of your grade. 
Students will be called upon to contribute to the class and, if required, to encourage 
participation. You are preparing for the workplace; expectations for attendance and 
participation in this class are the same as those of the professional workplace.  
Classroom Etiquette: Please silence and place out of sight all cell phones and other 
distracting electronic devices during class time. Texting, receiving or making calls, or surfing 
the web or any other electronic device use is considered very unprofessional and if it occurs 
will be reflected in your participation grade. If you use a laptop during class for anything but 
coursework during class, this will also be negatively reflected in your participation grade.   
Classroom Modifications and Accommodations: Students requesting accommodations 
need to submit documentation to the Office of Educational Services for Students so that their 
eligibility for special accommodations may be assessed. For students who need special 
accommodations, please see me after class or during my office hours so that appropriate 
arrangements may be made. 
Communication: All formal course communications will take place through Canvas. 
Students can communicate with the instructor through email (preferred method) or phone. 
The instructor will make every effort to answer emails on a timely basis. Students should 
3 
expect a response within 48 hours or for contact over the weekend, by the end of the day on 
Monday.  
Coursework and Grades: 
A course schedule is provided at the end of the syllabus. All assigned reading, pre-lectures, 
and pre-work should be completed prior to the date indicated on the course schedule. All 
course components will also be included in Canvas. Use of the “calendar” view is 
recommended. 
Performance Evaluation: Canvas will be used to distribute grades as timely as possible. 
Please feel free to discuss your performance with the professor at any time. Re-grade requests 
must be made in writing within one week of the grade being posted to Canvas. After that time 
all grades become final (unless there is a transcription error). Performance in this course will 
be assessed on the following components: 
2 Midterm Exams (20% each) 
40 % 
Comprehensive Final Exam 
25 % 
Adaptive Practice 
10 % 
Annual Report Project (ARP) 
10 % 
Homework 
10 % 
Participation  
5 % 
Total 
100% 
 
Grades will be determined for all students as follows: 
 
 
  
A = 90-100 percent  
D = 60-69 percent 
 
  
B = 80-89 percent 
F = Below 60 
 
  
C = 70-79 percent 
 
 
 
  
 
I reserve the right to lower (but not raise) the cutoffs for each grade. 
Midterm Exams: There will be three exams during the semester. The exams will cover 
topics that have been covered in class and may include any content from the assigned 
readings or other materials referenced during class. Exams will be out of 100 points each. 
Content and format of the exams will be discussed prior to each.  
There will be no makeup exams except for University sanctioned absences. However, your 
lowest midterm exam grade will be dropped when computing the total midterm exam 
average. Dropping your lowest midterm exam grade is a means to cover any unforeseen 
circumstances which come up in which you may have to miss an exam. I discourage you 
from skipping an exam early in the semester. It is best to take all exams and allow the lowest 
one to be dropped.  
Final Exam: The final exam will be a comprehensive review of the course. The content and 
format of the exam will be discussed prior to the exam.  
Adaptive Practice: To ensure you have completed each assigned reading, adaptive practice 
assignments are due before most every class. They will cover the content of the pre-assigned 
reading. Each day’s assignment is weighted equally—no late assignment or makeups are 
allowed. However, a score of 80% or higher will earn you the full points for the day and a 
4 
score of 50% or higher will earn you half points for the day. In addition, your lowest two 
scores will be dropped.  
Homework: There are eight on-line homework assignments scheduled for the semester. 
These assignments are included on the course schedule and will be made available the 
Thursday prior and are due on Tuesdays at midnight. To access these assignments, you will 
use WileyPlus which can be accessed through Canvas. Homework grades are based on 
completion and not accuracy (You must attempt every problem and score at least an 80% to 
receive full credit). Late homework will be accepted with a 10% penalty for each 24 hours it 
is late. Each homework is 10 points each and all of them count as part of your final 
homework grade. 
Homework content is an extension of what is covered in class, providing you the opportunity 
to master the topics. Therefore, homework problems are generally more difficult, and the 
questions will approach the topics from different angles than what has been covered in class. 
You may find it useful to form small study groups to for help with difficult concepts. 
However, the homework you submit should be your own work. Don’t squander away this 
opportunity to challenge yourself—mastering the topics with homework assignments 
correlates with success on exams.   
Class Participation: Sixty percent of your class participation grade will be based on 
attendance. The remaining forty percent will be based on active participation (e.g., answering 
questions, asking questions, contributing to class discussion). The textbook reading, pre-
lectures, and pre-work are all assigned to support your ability to be prepared to participate. 
To allow for missed classes due to unforeseen circumstances, your lowest two participation 
scores will be dropped.   
Annual Report Project (ARP on course schedule): Because accountancy and business 
professionals regularly work in teams, a team project is an important component of this 
course. The format, topics, expectations, and due-dates of the team project are provided in a 
separate document on Canvas and include both written and presentation-style components. 
Quality projects should incorporate material from the classroom lectures/discussions, 
readings, and items from your own outside research.   
Each team member will receive the same grade unless a member is deemed a free rider. 
Teams are responsible for informing the professor if free riders exist. If the group’s 
assessment is valid, the free rider’s grade may be deducted up to 100 percent. 
Career Exploration Assignment (CEA on course schedule): The career exploration 
assignment is the only opportunity to earn bonus points. Students who complete this 
assignment will earn 10 points towards their participation grade. To complete this 
assignment, students must first explore a career in accounting using the CEA handout 
available on Canvas. Students must then meet with the professor during office hours to 
discuss their career plans. All CEAs must be completed prior to the third exam. 
Academic Integrity: 
All students in this course are expected to adhere to Case and Weatherhead School standards 
of academic integrity.  All students are expected to comply with the university’s Academic 
Integrity Policy at http://bulletin.case.edu/undergraduatestudies/academicintegrity/ and the 
CWRU Statement of Ethics at http://students.case.edu/policy/ethics.html 
5 
As stated before, you are expected to do your assignments on your own. Any work done for 
this class must be your own original work.  Cheating, plagiarism, and other forms of 
academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course.  This includes, but is not limited to, 
consulting with another person during an exam, using technological tools inappropriately, 
turning in written work that was prepared by someone other than you, and making minor 
modifications to the work of someone else and turning it in as your own.  Ignorance will not 
be permitted as an excuse.   
If you are not sure whether something you plan to submit would be considered either 
cheating or plagiarism, it is your responsibility to ask for clarification.  If you use references 
for any assignment, please follow citation procedures accepted in U.S. universities, including 
full, appropriate citation of any materials accessed via the Web.  You must not copy 
information from websites unless you put it in quotation marks and directly cite the 
source.  Do not assume that some usage or action is acceptable if you are unsure.  Either ask 
me about it or consult credible sources of information on the subject.   
Any academic integrity violation will be submitted to the appropriate Case and/or 
Weatherhead disciplinary process, and may result in a grade of 0 for the work or for the 
course, as well as any further consequences deemed appropriate by the relevant disciplinary 
committee.  The student evaluation form for this course will contain a component which will 
permit you to assess the manner in which academic integrity is administered. 
 
 
 
6 
Course Schedule** 
Below is a preliminary list of topics and reading assignments. All reading should be completed prior to the day 
in which the topic is to be discussed. Additional assignments may be assigned throughout the semester. 
Class  
Date 
 
Topic/Learning objectives 
Textbook Reading and 
Pre-Lectures * 
Assignments 
1 
1/10 
M Course overview and introduction 
None 
 
 
2 
1/12 
W Business Organization 
Elements of Financial Information 
Three Types of Business Activities 
Syllabus 
Ch. 1 – LO 1-2 
 
 
 
1/17 
M MLK Jr. Holiday – No Class 
 
 
3 
1/19 
W The Financial Statements 
Elements of the Accounting Equation 
Ch. 1 – LO 3 
Ch. 2 – LO 1 
 
4 
1/24 
M Financial Statement Analysis 
Transaction Analysis using the 
Accounting Equation 
Ch. 2 – LO 2 
Ch. 3 – LO 2 
 
 
 
 
1/25 
T 
 
 
Homework 1 
due 11:59 pm 
5 
1/26 
W GAAP 
Accrual Accounting 
Ch. 3 – LO 1 
Ch. 4 – LO 1 
Day 5 Pre-lecture video 
 
6 
1/31 
M Accrual v. Cash Accounting 
Adjustments for Deferrals and Accruals 
Using the Accounting Equation 
Ch. 4 – LO 2, 3 
 
 
 
2/1 
T 
 
 
Homework 2 
due 11:59 pm 
7 
2/2 
W Introduction to ARP  
Financial Statement Research 
Review for Exam 1 
 
 
8 
2/7 
M Midterm Exam 1 
 
 
9 
2/9 
W Managing Cash 
Reporting Cash 
Ch. 5 – LO 1-2, LO 3 
(stop at Reconciliation 
Procedure) 
Ch 19 – LO 1 & 3 
ARP 1 Due 
10 
2/14 
M Perpetual and Periodic Inventory System 
Recording Purchases and Sales using the 
Accounting Equation 
Analyzing gross profit and profit margin 
Ch. 6 – LO 1 (read 
through “recording 
purchases under a 
perpetual inventory 
system”) 
Ch. 6 LO 2 (read through 
“recording sales”)  
Ch. 6 LO 4 all 
 
 
2/15 
T 
 
 
Homework 3 
due 11:59 
11 
2/16 
W Inventory Classifications 
Inventory Cost Flow Assumptions 
Ch. 7 – LO 1, 2, and 4 
 
7 
12 
2/21 
M Accounts Receivable – Allowance for 
Doubtful Accounts 
Recording Allowance for Doubtful 
Accounts Using the Accounting 
Equation 
Capital versus Expense Expenditures 
Ch. 7 – LO 3 
 
 
 
 
Ch. 8 – LO 1 
ARP 2 Due 
 
2/22 
T 
 
 
Homework 4 
due 11:59 pm 
13 
2/23 
W Depreciation 
Long-lived Assets Presentation and 
Analysis 
Ch. 8 – LO 2 (through 
“Depreciation Methods”) 
Ch. 8 – LO 5 
 
14 
2/28 
M Liabilities and Equity 
Exam 2 Review 
Ch. 9 – LO 1 (only 
“notes payable, unearned 
revenue, current 
maturities of long-term 
debt”) 
Ch. 9 – LO 2 just the 
first section (stop at 
issuing bonds section) 
Ch. 9 – LO 3 (skip 
section on preferred 
stock) 
 
15 
3/2 
W Midterm Exam 2 
 
 
 
3/7 
M Spring Break – No Class 
 
 
 
3/9 
W Spring Break – No Class 
 
 
16 
3/14 
M Financial Statement Analysis Using 
Excel 
Visual Analysis 
Ch. 10 – SKIM all LO 
Linked-In Learning 
videos on Excel 
Day 11 Pre-lecture video 
 
17 
3/16 
W Taxes 
See Canvas 
ARP 3 Due 
18 
3/21 
M Managerial accounting 
Managerial cost concepts 
Financial statements 
Value chain 
Trends in managerial accounting 
Corporate social responsibility 
Ch. 11 – LO 1-4 
 
 
3/22 
T 
 
 
Homework 5 
due 11:59 pm 
19 
3/23*** W Variable, fixed, & mixed costs 
Cost-volume-profit analysis 
Ch. 13 – LO 1-3 
 
20 
3/28 
M Break-even analysis 
Target net income 
Ch. 13 – LO 4-5 
 
 
3/29 
T 
 
 
Homework 6 
due 11:59 pm 
21 
3/30 
W Incremental analysis 
Special orders 
Make or buy 
Ch. 14 – LO 1-3 
ARP 4 Due 
22 
4/4 
M Sell or process further 
Repair, retain, or replace equipment 
Eliminate unprofitable segment / product 
Ch. 14 – LO 4-6 
 
 
4/5 
T 
 
 
Homework 7 
due 11:59 pm 
8 
23 
4/6 
W Budgetary Planning 
Ch 15 – LO 1-5 
 
24 
4/11 
M Budgetary Planning 
 
ARP 5 Due 
 
4/19 
T 
 
 
Homework 8 
due 11:59 pm 
25 
4/13 
W Standard Costs 
 
Ch. 17 – LO 1-4 
 
26 
4/18 
M Midterm Exam 3 
 
CEA Due 
27 
4/20 
W Annual Report Project Presentations 
(ARP 6) 
 
 
28 
4/25*** M Annual Report Project Presentations 
(ARP 6) 
 
ARP 7 & 8 Due 
Team Member 
Evaluations 
Due 
 
5/4 
W Final Exam ACCT 100 Section 100: 8-
11 am 
 
 
 
5/4 
W Final Exam ACCT 100 Section 102: 12-
3 pm 
 
 
* Each chapter in your textbook is divided between un-numbered sections and numbered Learning Objectives. 
Readings and homework/classwork assignments will primarily be based on Learning Objectives (LO). 
**This course schedule is not final. I reserve the right to make adjustments and changes as needed.  
***Upperclassman deadline to withdrawal is 3/25/22. Freshman withdrawal deadline is 4/25/22.  
