CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY 
Weatherhead School of Management 
 
BAFI 355  Corporate Finance– Fall 2023 
 
Instructor:   
 
Jose Olavarria 
 
Course:   
 
BAFI 355 – Corporate Finance 
 
Meeting time/day:  
Mondays/Wednesdays 9:00 AM - 10:15 AM (US Eastern Time Zone) 
 
 
 
Mondays/Wednesdays 12:45PM - 2:00 PM (US Eastern Time Zone) 
 
 
 
Mondays/Wednesdays 4:50PM - 6:05PM (US Eastern Time Zone) 
 
 
 
(Students must attend the section in which they are enrolled) 
 
Location:   
 
PBL Room 201 for section 100 (Mon/Wed 9:00-10:15 AM) 
 
 
 
PBL Room 203 for section 101 (Mon/Wed 12:45PM - 2:00 PM) 
 
 
 
PBL Room 258 for section 102 (Mon/Wed 4:50PM - 6:05PM) 
 
Zoom Link:       
 
https://cwru.zoom.us/j/4525893723?pwd=S29wUmhWeFcrNE5YenBXZzFOV1I3UT09  
 
Communication:  
jvo5@case.edu 
 
Course Website:  
http://canvas.case.edu/  
 
Office Location:  
PBL 265 
 
Office Hours:   
See office hours schedule under the “Syllabus” section of Canvas. 
If my regular office hours don’t work for you, please let me know and we can 
set up either Zoom or in-person office hours at a time that works for both of us.
 
 
 
 
Course Description: 
While the focus of the course is on the corporation and its financial decision-making, many basic 
concepts and tools in Finance are introduced. These basic concepts and tools are useful in many areas of 
business or personal life. They include the notion of present value, the relationship between risk and 
expected return, a familiarity with financial analysis, the impact of financial leverage, and the 
characteristics of and determining the value of securities.  Much of what you can learn in this course can 
make you a more savvy and effective consumer whether it be learning how to calculate loan payments 
and rates or the fundamentals of security valuation.  
 
Course Materials 
- No required textbook 
- All required readings/material will be posted on Canvas 
 
Required: 
 
1. This class requires familiarity with basic accounting concepts including reading and interpreting 
balance sheets, income statements, cash flow statements etc. 
 
2. Spreadsheet skills: I will make extensive use of spreadsheets during this course. Therefore, you may 
need to brush up your spreadsheet skills. 
 
It is assumed that all students have completed the following courses or their equivalents:  
 
Accountancy 101    OR  
 
Accountancy 303 
 
Attendance: 
Attendance is important in order for you to learn from our class discussions, ask questions, and get 
important information on concepts and assignments.  With this in mind, attendance will account for a 
portion of your total grade.  
 
Every student gets 2 unexcused absences for the semester. If you need to miss more lectures for any 
reason, please make sure you reach out to me in advance and provide valid documentation (doctor’s 
note, etc., in accordance with university policies).   
 
If you are late more than 15 minutes, you will receive no attendance credit for that particular class.  
 
Exams: 
Everyone is required to take the midterm/final exam at the scheduled time. If any student cannot take 
the exam for valid reasons (backed up by a medical certificate, for example) and informs the instructor 
before the exam, I reserve the right to give a different exam or an assignment (the student will run the 
risk that the degree of difficulty is higher from that for the rest of the class).  Without a valid reason and 
without informing the instructor before the exam, if a student misses the exam the student will receive 
a zero. 
 
Group Assignments:  
Group assignments will be done in teams of 4 students.  Once formed, teams will remain in place for the 
entire semester.  Groups should be formed by the end of our second week of classes.  
 
If you have a free-rider in your group, and due warning does not remedy the situation, please have your 
group bring it to my attention immediately.  In extreme cases of differential work efforts within your 
group, you may be allowed to change your group composition with my express consent, but only after 
due discussion with and notification of all involved parties. 
 
Peer Evaluations 
To make the grading more equitable and to assist in addressing the free rider problem, each student will 
complete a peer evaluation for other members of their group.  Evaluations will be kept confidential.  
We will use the following grading criteria for peer evaluations: 
 
 
Criteria 
Letter Grade 
Actively participated and completed all assigned tasks 
A (100-90) 
Participated but did not complete all assigned tasks 
B (89-80 
Barely participated and work was minimal-to-none  
C (79-70) 
Did not participate at all 
D (69-60) 
 
 
Individual Article Discussions:  
As a Weatherhead student, you should be aware of important financial news that are impacting the U.S. 
and other countries around the world. To encourage a constant review of financial news, we will have 
news article discussions. Instructions will be given during class.  
 
Late Assignments Submissions:  
Late assignments will not be accepted and will receive a 0/100.  
Final Letter Grades: 
Your final grade on the course will be the combination of the following categories:  
 
Activity 
Percentage of grade 
Class Attendance and Participation 
5% 
Group Assignments (x4) 
30% 
Peer Evaluations 
5% 
Individual Article Discussions (x3)  
10% 
Midterm Exam 
25% 
Final Exam 
25% 
 
Academic Integrity: 
All students in this course are expected to adhere to university standards of academic integrity.  Cheating, 
plagiarism, and other forms of academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course.  This includes, 
but is not limited to, consulting with another person during an exam, turning in written work that was 
prepared by someone other than you, and making minor modifications to the work of someone else and 
turning it in as your own.  Ignorance will not be permitted as an excuse.  If you are not sure whether 
something you plan to submit would be considered either cheating or plagiarism, it is your responsibility 
to ask for clarification. When your name appears on a group product for a class, you are responsible for 
the integrity of the work, even if you did not personally write the offending material.  
Please visit the link: 
http://bulletin.case.edu/weatherheadschoolofmanagement/policies/#academicintegritypolicytext 
 
Additionally, unless otherwise allowed by the instructor, the undisclosed and unattributed use of 
artificial intelligence programs (e.g., Chat GPT) for deliverables submitted under your name will be 
considered plagiarism unless proven by you to the contrary. 
 
