 
95-719 Accounting and Finance Analytics 
Course Syllabus, Fall 2023 (Mini 1) 
 
Instructor 
Jillian Stephenson 
Email: jstephe2@andrew.cmu.edu 
Office: HBH 3011 
Office Hours  
Tuesdays - 12:00pm-1:00pm (via Zoom),  
Thursday/Friday  - by appointment only
 
Lecture 
Section F – Monday and Wednesday 9:30am – 10:50am – Hamburg Hall 1005 
 
Teaching Assistants 
TBD 
 
TA Office Hours 
TBD 
 
Required Text 
We will be using 3 textbooks for this course.  All textbooks are available on OpenStax.com.  Each class 
session will have required reading that is to be completed before the lecture that is a subset of the full 
text.  The links to the reading will be included in Canvas in the Modules for the course.  We will be only 
using portions of each textbook, the required reading is only directly from the pages linked in Canvas.   
Dahlquist, J., & Knight, R. (2022). Principles of Finance. OpenStax. https://openstax.org/books/principles-
finance/pages/1-why-it-matters 
Franklin, M., Graybeal, P., & Cooper, D. (2019). Principles of Accounting, Volume 1: Financial Accounting. 
OpenStax. https://openstax.org/books/principles-financial-accounting/pages/1-why-it-matters 
Franklin, M., Graybeal, P., & Cooper, D. (2019). Principles of Accounting, Volume 2: Managerial 
Accounting. OpenStax. ttps://openstax.org/books/principles-managerial-accounting/pages/1-why-it-
matters 
Additional Resources 
Investopedia.com has a lot of useful finance and accounting information that is relevant to the course.  
Make sure for any calculations and ratios that we do during class, you need to use the formula from 
class in your assignments and quizzes.  There are variations of formulas that will give you a different 
answer and you will not get credit if you do not use the versions from class. 
 
Course Description 
The main objective of this course is to gain expertise in analyzing an organization's financial statements 
and related disclosures, in order to evaluate its performance. Students will learn about the key 
components of financial statements and then apply ratio and variance analysis to determine the 
financial position of a company. By extracting data and analyzing financial statements, students will 
improve their ability to make informed decisions about an organization's financial health. Toward the 
end of the course, students will also learn about capital investment decisions and discounted cash flow 
analysis, which can be used to support management decisions in various businesses. 
Course Objectives 
At the end of this course, you should be able to: 
-Describe core accounting principles as well as locate financial information for publicly traded 
companies. 
-Define and classify accounts on the balance sheet, income statement and cash flow statement. 
-Perform ratio and variance analysis on financial statements to identify trends and areas of concern for a 
company. 
-Evaluate capital budgeting techniques to determine financial viability of a project. 
 
 
Course Organization 
 
Canvas 
The course will utilize Canvas for all material needed.  All dates for assignments and exams are included 
in Canvas.  Class material is contained within the Modules tab in Canvas and organized by class session.  
Important class information will be communicated via Canvas through announcements so please make 
sure to check frequently.  (https://canvas.cmu.edu) 
 
Reading Materials 
Prior to each class there will be assigned reading from the required text which will be to your benefit to 
complete prior to lecture.  Since this class is only 7 weeks, we have a lot of material to go through during 
that time.  It is expected that you have read prior to lecture as we will be going over formulas and 
problems that you should have already seen in the reading material.  If you have questions from the 
reading, please ask as we review that section during lecture so topics can be clarified to help with your 
understanding.  
 
Grading Summary 
Class Participation/Attendance – 10% 
Group Project – 30% 
Assignments – 20% 
Quizzes – 40% 
 
I will be using the following grading scale based on the weighting above: 
 
A+ 98.0-100%   
 B+ 88.0-89.9%  
C+ 78.0-79.9%   
R  69.9% and below 
A 94.0-97.9%   
 B 84.0-87.9%   
C 74.0-77.9%  
A- 90.0-93.9%    
 B- 80.0-83.9%   
C- 70.0-73.9% 
 
The TA’s and I will work quickly to return assignments and quizzes via Gradescope/Canvas.  If you have a 
grading dispute, this must be communicated via Gradescope for assignments and to the Professor for 
the Quizzes.  You have one week from receiving your grade to submit a dispute.  You will need to 
provide specific details/questions on the dispute and to which question it relates. 
 
Attendance & Participation 
Attendance for the course will be tracked via a sheet passed around at the beginning of the class.  It is 
your responsibility to sign the sheet.  If you come to class late repeatedly, this will count as a missed 
class.  You may miss 2 classes for any reason (job interview, sickness, deadlines, etc) and still receive the 
full attendance points for the course.  You may notify me or the TA’s if you will miss class, however it is 
not required.  If you miss more than 2 classes, you will be eligible for 90% of the attendance grade with 
reductions for additional missed classes.   
As an interactive class, you are expected to participate (e.g., engage with the professor and group 
members during class). You may be awarded additional bonus points for extra effort. As a note, these 
points are completely at the professor's discretion and based on direct observations during class and will 
be assigned during final grading.  No additional extra credit or bonus points is offered during the course. 
If there are extenuating circumstances that result in the class moving to a Remote environment via 
Zoom, this will be communicated via Canvas.  Please make sure your announcements are turned on so 
that you do not miss any of this communication. 
 
Assignments 
There will be individual assignments during the course which will account for a portion of your total 
grade.  The assignments will be posted by Wednesday around 4:30pm of the associated week with a due 
date by the following Thursday night at 11:59pm EST.  Any questions related to the assignments should 
be addressed during lecture, office hours or during recitation so please do not wait until the last minute 
to look at the assignment.   
 
Your work is to be completed individually on the assignments.  You are welcome to ask other students 
questions but completing the assignments together is not permitted.  Having possession of another 
students’ assignment in any form is considered an Academic Integrity violation and will not be tolerated.  
Assignments will be checked for plagiarism using the Turnitin application.     
 
Assignments turned in after the due date will be eligible for a maximum of 90% of the original grade.  
You have a late grace period of 24 hours past the due date to turn in the assignment for the reduced 
grade.   Past the late grace period of 24 hours, assignments will not be accepted. 
 
Free Pass – Each student is eligible for 1 free pass where you can submit an assignment within 24 hours 
of the due date and you will still be eligible for 100% of the assignment points.  You must email the 
Professor to use this free pass prior to the due date deadline.  You can only use this pass on Assignments 
1 & 2. 
 
Quizzes 
There will be two quizzes in this course and both will be given during our scheduled class sessions.  The 
quizzes will be given in person using Canvas with Respondus Lockdown Browser and will include multiple 
choice, fill in the blank, true/false and matching questions.  Non-messaging calculators will be permitted 
as well as 1 note sheet and scratch paper.  Anything discussed in lecture, required reading or 
assignments is possible to be on the quiz.  If you miss a quiz or take the quiz remotely without prior 
permission from the professor, you will receive a zero. 
 
Group Project 
During the second half of the course, you will be assigned a group project that will be completed by the 
end of the course.  The project will require you to select companies to analyze and provide a written 
report on the trends you have identified on each of the company’s financial statements as well as the 
determination if a company should proceed with a capital budgeting purchase. 
Academic Integrity 
All assignments that you are submitting should be in your own words, not classmates and not directly 
taken from the book or online resources.  You may work with classmates to discuss assignments and ask 
questions, but the assignments are to be completed individually.  I will be checking for plagiarism 
amongst assignments which includes having the same sentences as a classmate.  Cheating on 
assignments or quizzes will not be tolerated and will be communicated to Your Program Director, The 
Associate Dean and The Dean of Student Affairs at the University.  If you are caught cheating, your final 
grade will be reduced by 2 letter grades.   
https://www.cmu.edu/policies/student-and-student-life/academic-integrity.html 
 
You may use generative AI programs like ChatGPT during the class and/or assignments to help you 
understand course content but not to generate answers to assignment problems.  Generative AI 
programs rely on predictive models to generate content that may appear correct, but has been shown 
to sometimes be incomplete, inaccurate, taken without attribution from other sources, and / or biased. 
You are ultimately responsible for the content of the information you submit. However, you may not 
attempt to pass off any work generated by an AI program as your own.  
Accommodations for Students with Disabilities 
If you have a disability and have an accommodations letter from the Disability Resources office, I 
encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with me as early in the semester as possible. 
I will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. If you suspect that you 
may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations but are not yet registered with the Office 
of Disability Resources, I encourage you to contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu. 
 
Additional Course/University Information: 
Student Wellness 
Please make it a priority to take care of yourself during the semester.  Focus on a healthy lifestyle to 
help you achieve your goals and what you are hoping to accomplish during your time here.  There are a 
variety of resources available to ask for help.  Don’t wait and get help if you feel that you need it. 
 
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety 
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) 
is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and visit their website at http://www.cmu.edu/counseling/. Consider 
reaching out to a friend, faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected to the support 
that can help. 
 
If you or someone you know is feeling suicidal or in danger of self-harm, call someone immediately, day 
or night: 
CaPS: 412-268-2922 
Re:solve Crisis Network: 888-796-8226 
If the situation is life threatening, call the police 
On campus: CMU Police: 412-268-2323 
Off campus: 911 
 
Diversity 
We are diverse in many ways, and this diversity is fundamental to building and maintaining an equitable 
and inclusive campus community. Diversity can refer to multiple ways that we identify ourselves, 
including but not limited to race, color, national origin, language, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation, 
gender identity, religion, creed, ancestry, belief, veteran status, or genetic information. Each of these 
diverse identities, along with many others not mentioned here, shape the perspectives our students, 
faculty, and staff bring to our campus. We, at CMU, will work to promote diversity, equity and inclusion 
not only because diversity fuels excellence and innovation, but because we want to pursue justice. We 
acknowledge our imperfections while we also fully commit to the work, inside and outside of our 
classrooms, of building and sustaining a campus community that increasingly embraces these core 
values.  Each of us is responsible for creating a safer, more inclusive environment. 
Unfortunately, incidents of bias or discrimination do occur, whether intentional or unintentional. They 
contribute to creating an unwelcoming environment for individuals and groups at the university. 
Therefore, the university encourages anyone who experiences or observes unfair or hostile treatment 
on the basis of identity to speak out for justice and support, within the moment of the incident or after 
the incident has passed. Anyone can share these experiences using the following resources: 
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion: csdi@andrew.cmu.edu, (412) 268-2150 
Report-It online anonymous reporting platform: reportit.net username: tartans password: plaid 
All reports will be documented and deliberated to determine if there should be any following actions. 
Regardless of incident type, the university will use all shared experiences to transform our campus 
climate to be more equitable and just. 
Food Insecurity 
If you are worried about affording food or feeling insecure about food, there are resources on campus 
that can help. Email the CMU Food Pantry Coordinator to schedule an appointment: 
 
Pantry Coordinator: 
cmu-pantry@andrew.cmu.edu 
412-268-8704 (SLICE office) 
 
Student Academic Success Center 
The Student Academic Success Center offers a wide variety of opportunities for students to deepen their 
understanding of who they are as learner, communicator, and ultimately scholar.   They support student 
success by providing academic coaching, communication consulting and workshops, accommodations 
and support for students with disabilities, and language support for English language learners. The 
program offerings are free and open to all students.   You can access the center here: 
https://www.cmu.edu/student-success/programs/index.html 
 
The following is a tentative schedule for the Mini.  Any changes will be 
announced in class and through Canvas: 
 
Date
Lecture Topic
Due Dates/Exams
8/28/2023 Introduction to Financial Statements
8/30/2023 Financial Statements & Accounting Principles
9/4/2023
NO CLASS 
9/6/2023
Balance Sheet - Current Assets 
 Assignment #1 Due (9/7/23)
9/11/2023 Balance Sheet - NonCurrent Assets
9/13/2023 Balance Sheet - Liabilities
 Assignment #2 Due (9/14/23)
9/18/2023 Balance Sheet - Stockholders' Equity
9/20/2023 QUIZ 1
9/25/2023 Income Statement
9/27/2023 Cash Flow Statement
9/29/2023
Part 1 - Group Project Due 5pm
10/2/2023 Investment Decision Making
10/4/2023 Investment Analysis Methods
10/6/2023
Part 2 - Group Project Due 5pm
10/9/2023 Trend Analysis & Review
10/11/2023 QUIZ 2
10/13/2023
Final Group Case & Peer Evaluation Submitted by 
5pm
