COMM370:  CORPORATE FINANCE
Course Outline 
- 1 -
COURSE INFORMATION 
Division: Finance      
Instructor: Joyce Guan        
Email*:  joyce.guan@sauder.ubc.ca    
Office:  HA 884A (please note office 
hours are held in a different location)      
Office Hours:  
Wednesday     15:00 – 17:00  HA358
Term/period:  2018 Winter, Term 2 
Course duration: Jan 02 – Apr 04, 2019
Section numbers: 201 and 202 
Class meeting times and location:  
Section 201: M W 11:30 – 13:00 HA037 
Section 202: M W 13:00 – 14:30 HA037  
Pre-requisite: COMM 298 
 Website: https://canvas.ubc.ca/ 
*(Please always include COMM370, section 201 or 202, and your NAME in the email subject 
line. Please use this email for messaging and do not send emails from inside Canvas)
COURSE DESCRIPTION 
The purpose of this course is to provide working knowledge of key corporate finance decisions that 
are important in the life of a corporation and, more generally, to help students acquire an 
understanding of broad economic issues that are of wide applicability in many areas of corporate 
finance. The course balances rigorous theoretical content and practical applications. You will gain 
experience in applying empirical and theoretical tools through the class discussion of two cases, 
as well as through your work on ungraded practice problem sets. Topics covered in the course 
include financial analysis and planning, capital structure policy, capital budgeting, the treatment of 
debt financing in capital budgeting, dividend policy, how corporations raise capital, and mergers 
and acquisitions. 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
While the main goal of the course is to familiarize students with the fundamental concepts in 
corporate finance, we will also emphasize these concepts’ practical applications. This will be done 
through case studies, problem sets, and real-world examples. At the end of the course, students 
will be able to: 
•
Implement financial analysis and planning
•
Estimate a project’s cash flows
•
Estimate a project’s cost of capital
•
Evaluate capital structure policy
•
Determine how debt financing affects capital budgeting
•
Evaluate payout policy
•
Describe how a company can raise capital
•
Identify key issues in mergers and acquisitions
COMM370:  CORPORATE FINANCE
Course Outline 
- 2 -
ASSESSMENT 
SUMMARY 
Midterm Exam 
40% 
Final Exam 
60% 
DETAILS 
There will be a midterm exam worth 40% of your grade and a final exam worth 60% of your grade. 
The evaluation weights listed above are non-negotiable and both exams will be closed book.  
You are required to take both exams in order to obtain a passing grade. 
The final exam is cumulative, but weighted more towards the material in the second half of the 
term.  
In order to pass the course, the student must achieve a minimum of 50% on the final exam and 
achieve a weighted average on the combined midterm and final of at least 50%. 
Please see the section POLICIES & PROCEDURES for additional important information. 
COMM 370 midterm exam
Time: Friday, Feb 8th 19:00 – 21:00
Location: SWNG 221
COURSE RESOURCES AND MATERIALS 
Lecture Notes 
Lecture notes will be posted on the Canvas course website before each lecture. The lecture 
notes are important study materials. You should print and bring the notes with you to the 
lectures. 
Textbook 
Corporate Finance, 2015 (7th Canadian Edition) by Ross, Westerfield, Jaffe and Roberts 
(RWJR) is required. The textbook comes packaged with a MHE Connect code which provides 
access to the e-text, online practice problems and adaptive learning software. Many students will 
have used this textbook in the prior course, COMM 298. The RWJR textbook is available at the 
bookstore for purchase. (Any edition available to you is fine).
COMM370:  CORPORATE FINANCE
Course Outline 
- 3 -
Cases 
At least two cases will be covered in class during the term and are required reading.  The two 
Harvard Business School cases, “Clarkson Lumber Company” and “Massey-Ferguson Ltd., 
1980”, can be purchased directly from Ivey Publishing's website.  Instructions for purchasing the 
cases are as follows: 
Go to the Ivey Publishing website at www.iveycases.com 
1.
Log in to your existing account or click "Register" to create a new account and follow the
prompts to complete the registration. If registering, choose the "Student User" role.
2.
Click on this link or copy into your
browser: https://www.iveycases.com/CoursepackView.aspx?id=20176
3.
Click "Add to Cart".
4.
You may choose to order in either print or digital  format.
o
To order the material in digital format, check "digital download" and click "OK".
o
To order a printed copy for delivery, enter the print quantity required and click
"OK". Please note that shipping charges will apply.
5.
Go to the Shopping Cart (located at the top of the page), click "Checkout", and complete
the checkout process.
6.
When payment has been processed successfully, an Order Confirmation will be emailed
to you immediately and you will see the Order Confirmation screen.
o
If you ordered digital copies: Click "Download your Digital Items" or go to "My
Orders" to access the file.
o
If you ordered printed copies: Your order will be printed and shipped within 2 to 3
business days.
IMPORTANT: Access to downloadable files will expire 30 days from the order date, so be sure to 
save a copy on your computer. The downloadable file is a PDF document that can be opened 
using Adobe Reader. 
This material is for your personal use only and is not to be shared or distributed in any 
form. 
This is an automated message - please do not reply to this email.  Contact your professor directly 
or contact Ivey Publishing during business hours. 
Ivey Publishing 
Ivey Business School 
Western University 
e. cases@ivey.ca
t. 519.661.3208 | tf. 800.649.6355
www.iveycases.com
Business Hours: 
Monday to Thursday: 8:00am-4:30pm (ET) 
Friday: 8:00am-4:00pm  
COMM370:  CORPORATE FINANCE
Course Outline 
- 4 -
WEEK # 
DATE 
CLASS TOPICS 
READINGS 
WEEK 0 
Jan 02 
Introduction to Corporate Finance 
Chapter 1 
WEEK 1 
Jan 07 
Financial Analysis and Planning 
Chapters 2, 2B 
Jan 09
Financial Analysis and Planning 
Chapters 2A 
WEEK 2 
Jan 14
Financial Analysis and Planning 
Chapters 3 
Jan 16
Financial Analysis and Planning 
Chapters 27 
WEEK 3 
Jan 21
Financial Analysis and Planning 
Clarkson Lumber case 
Jan 23
Capital Budgeting: NPV 
Chapter 8 
WEEK 4 
Jan 28
Capital Budgeting: NPV 
Chapter 8 
Jan 30
Capital Budgeting: NPV 
Chapter 8 
WEEK 5 
Feb 04
Feb 06 
No Class 
Feb 08
Midterm 19:00 - 21:00 SWNG221  
WEEK 6 
Feb 11
Capital Budgeting: WACC 
Chapter 13 
Feb 13
Capital Budgeting: WACC 
Chapter 13 
WEEK 7 
Feb 25
Capital Structure: Basics
Chapter 16 
Feb 27
Capital Structure: Basics
Chapter 16 
WEEK 8 
Mar 04
Capital Structure: Limits to Debt 
Chapter 17, 31 
Mar 06
Capital Budgeting with Debt 
Chapter 18 
WEEK 9 
Mar 11
Capital Budgeting with Debt 
Chapter 18 
Mar 13
Payout Policy 
Chapter 19 
WEEK 10 
Mar 18
Payout Policy
Chapter 19
Mar 20
Capital Structure case 
Massey-Ferguson case 
WEEK 11 
Mar 25
Raising Capital 
Chapters 20,21 
Mar 27
Raising Capital 
Chapters 20,21 
WEEK 12 
Apr 01
Mergers and acquisitions 
Chapter 30 
Apr 03
Mergers and acquisitions 
Chapter 30 
EXAM 
TBD 
Final Exam
Cumulative, weighted more towards the 
material in the second half of the term.  
Chapter 1, 2, 2A&B, 3, 27, 8 + Clarkson Lumber 
Midterm Review
COMM370:  CORPORATE FINANCE
Course Outline 
- 5 -
TEACHING & LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
The lecture notes available from Canvas course website are important reference material you 
need to digest very carefully to do well in this course. You should print and bring the lecture notes 
to class. These notes may contain blank spaces which you are responsible for completing in 
class. 
Practice problems are not graded but are essential for your understanding of the material. The 
solutions will be posted on Canvas. I encourage you to solve the practice problems on your own 
or in a small study group (even better). The LearnSmart quizzes in MHE Connect allow you to 
test your basic knowledge of concepts and simple calculations after you have read a chapter or 
while reading a chapter online.  
The textbook, RWJR, provides a good discussion of most topics covered in class, many practical 
examples, and practice questions. It should be used together with the detailed lecture notes 
provided.  
The case studies are required readings. To make the best out of these cases, you should read 
them carefully before they are discussed in class and be ready to summarize them and express 
your views.  
I may provide additional readings, cases or supplementary material that I will make available 
on Canvas course website. 
Attend the lectures and come well-prepared to participate in class. Classes are more dynamic 
and interesting when students express their views. Please feel free to ask questions or contribute 
to our discussions at any time. I would also appreciate feedback about how to improve the course. 
I suggest you prepare a printed name card and you place it in front of you during each lecture. 
This will help me learn your names and will facilitate our communication in class. 
Visit the course website regularly and check for important announcements. 
COMM370:  CORPORATE FINANCE
Course Outline 
- 6 -
COURSE AND INSTITUTIONAL POLICIES 
1. If for any reason you miss an exam, you must contact the Undergraduate Office immediately and 
provide them with the documentation necessary to justify your absence.
2. If you miss the midterm (with a UGO-excused absence) you will, at the Instructor’s discretion, 
either be given an opportunity to write an alternate midterm exam or will have the weight from the 
midterm exam transferred to the final exam.
3. If you know in advance that you are unable to write the midterm exam on the scheduled date or 
time due to a valid reason (e.g., a UBC course conflict), you must email your course instructor at 
least TWO weeks before the scheduled midterm exam and provide all necessary documentation.
4. Only midterm exams written in INK will be eligible to be re-read. You may, of course, choose to 
write an exam in pencil but, in doing so, you will release your right to request a re-read.
5. If you wish to have your midterm exam re-read, you must submit your detailed request in writing 
within five business days of the date the midterm exams were returned in class. If a request is 
made, all questions on the exam may be re-evaluated and a new higher or lower grade may be 
assigned.
6. You must attend ONLY your registered section of COMM 370. Since the sections of the course 
are full, attending at an alternative time will deprive another student of their seat.
7. Note that different instructors teach different sections of COMM370 and that exams are NOT 
COMMON to all sections of the course. Hence, you must attend classes with your designated 
instructor.
8. Please arrive to the classroom at the designated time to avoid disturbing the class after it has 
begun.
9. Do not use your cell phones or send/view text messages during class. For emergency situations, 
please excuse yourself from the classroom.
10.
The responsible use of laptops is allowed only for class purposes, like taking notes or 
as directed by the instructor, but not for checking email or surfing the web during class time.
11.
You are encouraged to ask questions and make comments during the lecture. 
Comments should be addressed to the whole class and private discussion among students should 
be avoided.
12.
Only non-graphing scientific and business calculators are allowed during the exams.
13.
Contacting your instructor during office hours is the preferred method of contact. Any 
email to your instructor should include YOUR COURSE, YOUR SECTION and YOUR NAME in 
the subject line. 
14.
The instructor reserves the right to make changes to this course syllabus.
