Financial Accounting Fundamentals
University of Virginia
Grades
Notes
Discussion Forums
Messages
Resources
Course Info
Financial Accounting Fundamentals
by University of Virginia
 Show less
Taught by:
Luann J. Lynch, Almand R. Coleman Professor of Business
Administration
Darden School of Business
Basic Info
Course 1 of 4 in the Entrepreneurship: Growing Your Business Specialization
Level
Beginner
Commitment
5 weeks of study, 2-3 hours/week
Language
English, Subtitles: Arabic, French, Ukrainian, Chinese (Simpliﬁed), Greek, Italian, Portuguese (Brazilian), Vietnamese, Dutch, Korean, German, Russian, Thai,
Indonesian, Swedish, Turkish, Spanish, Hindi, Japanese, Kazakh, Hungarian, Polish
Volunteer to translate subtitles for this course
Hardware Req
N/A
How To Pass
Pass all graded assignments to complete the course.
User Ratings
Syllabus
Course Material
About this Course
This course, developed at the Darden School of Business at the University of Virginia and taught by top-ranked faculty, will teach you the tools you'll need to understand the fundamentals 
of ﬁnancial accounting. Concise videos, the ﬁnancial records of a small business, and "your turn" activities guide you through the three most commonly used ﬁnancial statements: the 
Balance Sheet, the Income Statement, and the Statement of Cash Flows. Beyond recording transactions, you'll learn how to prepare these ﬁnancial statements, and read and analyze them 
to draw basic conclusions about a company's ﬁnancial health.
By the end of this course, you will be able to:
- Use journal entries to record transactions
- Prepare and use t-accounts to summarize transactions recorded during an accounting period
- Describe the three most commonly used ﬁnancial statements and how they ﬁt together
- Prepare these ﬁnancial statements based on transactions recorded during an accounting period
- Draw basic conclusions about a company's ﬁnancial health
4.8 stars
Week 1
Introduction to Financial Accounting, the Financial Statements, and the Balance Sheet
14 videos, 2 readings, 1 practice quiz
During this ﬁrst week, we’ll learn about the context for ﬁnancial accounting, including the informational role it plays for both internal and external audiences. We’ll explain
accounting standards, which ensure ﬁnancial information is conveyed clearly and eﬀectively. Finally, we’ll describe the three primary ﬁnancial statements as part of a recurring
accounting process, called the accounting cycle, and then dive into one of those statements: the Balance Sheet (BS).
1. Reading: Welcome to the Specialization
2. Video: Introduction to the Course
3. Discussion Prompt: Introduce Yourself
 
Show less
Graded: Week 1 Graded Quiz
Week 2
Introduction to Recording Transactions
13 videos, 1 practice quiz
Show less
Graded: Week 2 Graded Quiz
Week 3
The Income Statement, Revenue and Expense Transactions, and Adjusting Entries
14 videos, 1 practice quiz
4. Reading: Course Overview
5. Video: What Is Accounting?
6. Video: 3 Sets of Books
7. Video: An Informational Role for Financial Accounting
8. Video: Accounting Standards Inside the U.S.
9. Video: Accounting Standards Outside the U.S.
10. Video: The Financial Statements
11. Video: The Financial Statements: A Framework
12. Video: The Accounting Cycle
13. Video: The Balance Sheet
14. Video: Assets
15. Video: Liabilities
16. Video: Owners' Equity
17. Video: The Balance Sheet: A Summary
18. Practice Quiz: Week 1 Practice Quiz
After learning about the Balance Sheet, we’re ready to move on to using journal entries to record transactions, then t-accounts to summarize transactions recorded during an
accounting period. We’ll apply those tools to record transactions for a ﬁctional startup company, The Garden Spot, during its ﬁrst year of operations (TGS Year 1). As we go along,
we’ll also evaluate the eﬀect of transactions on the balance sheet equation to ensure it remains balanced.
1. Video: Introduction to Recording Transactions
2. Video: T-Accounts: A Tutorial
3. Video: Journal Entries: A Tutorial
4. Video: Recording Transactions: Example 1
5. Video: Recording Transactions: Example 2
6. Video: Recording Transactions: Example 3
7. Video: Recording Transactions: Your Turn
8. Video: Introduction to TGS Year 1
9. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 1
10. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 2
11. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 3
12. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 4
13. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 5 and a Summary
14. Practice Quiz: Week 2 Practice Quiz
15. Discussion Prompt: Discuss Interesting and/or Challenging Items
Now that we’ve learned the fundamentals of recording transactions, we’re ready to dive into another ﬁnancial statement: the Income Statement (IS). After learning about the
Income Statement, we’ll record revenue and expense transactions, and summarize these transactions in a special account. Finally, we'll record adjusting entries in accordance
with accrual accounting, prior to the preparation of the ﬁnancial statements.
1. Video: Introduction to the Income Statement
2. Video: Revenues
3. Video: Expenses
4. Video: The Income Statement: A Summary
Show less
Graded: Week 3 Graded Quiz
Week 4
The Statement of Cash Flows, Financial Statement Preparation
16 videos, 1 practice quiz
Show less
Graded: Week 4 Graded Quiz
Week 5
More Transactions, Analysis of Financial Statements, and an Annual Report
16 videos, 1 practice quiz
5. Video: Revenue and Expense Transactions: A Tutorial
6. Video: Recording Revenue and Expense Transactions: Your Turn
7. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 6
8. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 7
9. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 8
10. Video: Adjusting Entries: A Tutorial
11. Video: Recording Adjusting Entries: Your Turn
12. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 9
13. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 10
14. Video: TGS Year 1: Transaction 11 and a Summary
15. Practice Quiz: Week 3 Practice Quiz
16. Discussion Prompt: Discuss Interesting and/or Challenging Items
After learning about the Income Statement, revenue and expense transactions, and adjusting entries, we’re ready to move on to preparing our end-of-period ﬁnancial
statements. We’ll prepare the Income Statement and Balance Sheet based on the transactions that have been recorded. Then, we’ll dive into the Statement of Cash Flows (SCF)
and learn how to prepare that ﬁnancial statement. Finally, we’ll brieﬂy discuss closing entries, since we've been preparing them as we've been going along!
1. Video: Introduction to Financial Statement Preparation
2. Video: TGS Year 1: Preparing the Income Statement
3. Video: TGS Year 1: Preparing the Balance Sheet
4. Video: TGS Year 1: Revisiting the Financial Statement Framework
5. Video: A Managerial Approach to Recording Transactions
6. Video: Transactions from the Viewpoint of a Manager
7. Video: Introduction to the Statement of Cash Flows
8. Video: Explaining the Change in Cash: A Tutorial
9. Video: TGS Year 1: Preparing the Operating Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows
10. Video: TGS Year 1: Preparing the Investing Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows
11. Video: TGS Year 1: Preparing the Financing Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows
12. Video: Closing Entries
13. Video: The Statement of Cash Flows: A Conceptual Understanding
14. Video: TGS Year 1: Using the Direct Method to Prepare the Statement of Cash Flows
15. Video: TGS Year 1: Using the Indirect Method to Prepare the Statement of Cash Flows
16. Video: The Direct and Indirect Methods: A Summary
17. Practice Quiz: Week 4 Practice Quiz
18. Discussion Prompt: Discuss Interesting and/or Challenging Items
During this last week, we’ll walk through the second year of operations for our ﬁctional startup company, The Garden Spot (TGS Year 2), for additional practice recording
transactions and preparing our end-of-period ﬁnancial statements. Then, we’ll do some analysis of The Garden Spot’s ﬁnancial statements. Finally, we’ll take a look at PepsiCo’s
Annual Report as an example of reporting for a publicly traded U.S. company.
1. Video: Introduction to TGS Year 2
2. Video: TGS Year 2: Transactions 1-7
3. Video: TGS Year 2: Transactions 8-11
4. Video: TGS Year 2: Transactions 12-16
View Less
How It Works
General
 Show less
Entrepreneurship: Growing Your Business
University of Virginia
View the course in catalog
Show less
Graded: Week 5 Graded Quiz
5. Video: TGS Year 2: Transactions 17-22
6. Video: TGS Year 2: The Financial Statements
7. Video: TGS Year 2: Preparing the Operating Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows
8. Video: TGS Year 2: Preparing the Investing Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows
9. Video: TGS Year 2: Preparing the Financing Activities Section of the Statement of Cash Flows
10. Video: TGS Year 2: Revisiting the Financial Statement Framework
11. Video: Analysis of the Income Statement
12. Video: Analysis of the Statement of Cash Flows
13. Video: Analysis of the Balance Sheet and a Summary
14. Video: PepsiCo's Annual Report
15. Video: PepsiCo's 10-K
16. Practice Quiz: Week 5 Practice Quiz
17. Video: Conclusion of the Course
18. Discussion Prompt: Mission Accomplished?
How do I pass?
To earn your Certiﬁcate, you’ll need to earn a passing grade on each of the required assignments—these can be quizzes, peer-graded assignments, or programming assignments.
Videos, readings, and practice exercises are there to help you prepare for the graded assignments.
What do start dates and end dates mean?
Once you enroll, you’ll have access to all videos, readings, quizzes, and programming assignments (if applicable). If you choose to explore the content without purchasing, you may
not be able to access certain assignments. If you don’t ﬁnish all graded assignments before the end of the session, you can reset your deadlines. Your progress will be saved and
you’ll be able to pick up where you left oﬀ.
What are due dates? Is there a penalty for submitting my work after a due date?
Within a course, there are suggested due dates to help you manage your schedule and keep work from piling up. Quizzes and programming assignments can be submitted late
without consequence. However, it is possible that you won't receive a grade if you submit your peer-graded assignment too late because classmates usually review assignment within
three days of the assignment deadline.
Can I re-attempt an assignment?
Yes. If you want to improve your grade, you can always try again. If you’re re-attempting a peer-graded assignment, re-submit your work as soon as you can to make sure there’s
enough time for your classmates to review your work. In some cases you may need to wait before re-submitting a programming assignment or quiz. We encourage you to review
learning material during this delay.
Course 1 of Specialization
