Fundamentals of Finance
University of California, Irvine
Grades
Notes
Discussion Forums
Messages
Course Info
Fundamentals of Finance
by University of California, Irvine
 Show less
Taught by:
Marla Noel, UCI Division of Continuing Education Instructor
Basic Info
Course 2 of 3 in the Introduction to Business Specialization
Level
Beginner
Commitment
4 weeks of study, 2-3 hours/week
Language
English, Subtitles: Arabic, French, Ukrainian, Chinese (Simpliﬁed), Greek, Italian, Portuguese (Brazilian), Vietnamese, Dutch, Korean, German, Russian, Thai,
Indonesian, Swedish, Turkish, Spanish, Hindi, Japanese, Kazakh, Polish
Volunteer to translate subtitles for this course
How To Pass
Pass all graded assignments to complete the course.
User Ratings
Syllabus
Course Material
About this Course
Welcome to Fundamentals of Finance. This 4 module course will help you understand and aﬀect the performance of your unit or organization’s proﬁtability. By the end of this course, you 
will be able to implement ﬁnance and accounting concepts to drive your organization's growth, analyze ﬁnancial statements and understand the factors in productivity and proﬁtability, 
and create forecasting and budgeting. You will also have the ability to evaluate and manage cash ﬂow, implement strategies around ﬁnancing, and use of ratios in running a business.
4.7 stars
Week 1
Module 1: Financial Statements
3 videos, 1 reading
Show less
Graded: Module 1 Knowledge Check
Week 2
Proﬁtability, Productivity, and Cash Flow
Welcome to Module 1. In this module, you will learn about the components of the ﬁnancial statements and how they can help drive the business to success. You will understand
how the ﬁnancial statements are created and where assets, liabilities, equity, revenues and expenses are generated as part of a business operation.
1. Video: Course Introduction
2. Video: Understand Your Financial Statements
3. Video: Understand Your Financial Statements Continued
4. Reading: Required Readings & Resources
5. Discussion Prompt: Financial Statements
 
View Less
How It Works
General
1 video, 1 reading
Show less
Graded: Module 2 Knowledge Check
Week 3
Forecasting and Financing
1 video, 1 reading
Show less
Graded: Module 3 Knowledge Check
Week 4
Growing the Business with Expense Controls
Welcome to Module 4. In this module, you will learn how business growth can impact cash ﬂow, how to use ratios to monitor and control business growth. You will understand
various methods of maintaining control over the expenses of the business.
1 video, 1 reading
Show less
Graded: Statement of Cash Flow and Ratios
Welcome to Module 2. In this module, you will understand how to become proﬁtable using ﬁnancial information and how to evaluate labor as a component of productivity. You
will learn about the importance of cash ﬂow and how to monitor and control cash ﬂow as a key component of maintaining the business.
1. Video: Proﬁtability Labor and Cash Flow
2. Reading: Required Readings & Resources
3. Discussion Prompt: Proﬁtability and Cash Flow
Welcome to Module 3. In this module, you will learn the various sources of funding for businesses and the information required to obtain funding. In addition, you will learn
about how to forecast and develop solid banking relationships through eﬀective communication and maintenance of good records and documentation.
1. Video: Forecasting & Financing
2. Reading: Required Readings & Resources
3. Discussion Prompt: Sources of Capital and Banking Relationships
1. Video: Growing the Business with Expense Controls
2. Reading: Required Readings & Resources
3. Discussion Prompt: Growing the Business with Expense Controls
How do I pass?
To earn your Certiﬁcate, you’ll need to earn a passing grade on each of the required assignments—these can be quizzes, peer-graded assignments, or programming assignments.
Videos, readings, and practice exercises are there to help you prepare for the graded assignments.
What do start dates and end dates mean?
Once you enroll, you’ll have access to all videos, readings, quizzes, and programming assignments (if applicable). If you choose to explore the content without purchasing, you may
not be able to access certain assignments. If you don’t ﬁnish all graded assignments before the end of the session, you can reset your deadlines. Your progress will be saved and
you’ll be able to pick up where you left oﬀ.
What are due dates? Is there a penalty for submitting my work after a due date?
Within a course, there are suggested due dates to help you manage your schedule and keep work from piling up. Quizzes and programming assignments can be submitted late
without consequence. However, it is possible that you won't receive a grade if you submit your peer-graded assignment too late because classmates usually review assignment within
three days of the assignment deadline.
Can I re-attempt an assignment?
Yes. If you want to improve your grade, you can always try again. If you’re re-attempting a peer-graded assignment, re-submit your work as soon as you can to make sure there’s
enough time for your classmates to review your work. In some cases you may need to wait before re-submitting a programming assignment or quiz. We encourage you to review
learning material during this delay.
 Show less
Peer-graded assignments
 Show less
Jumpstart Your Business Management Career!
Adopt industry recommended best practices in business management, digital marketing, and ﬁnance.
Introduction to Business
University of California, Irvine
View the course in catalog
Related Courses
Peer-graded assignments require you and your classmates to grade each other’s
work.
How do peer graded assignments work?
After you submit your assignment, you will review some of your peers’ assignments. The number of assignments you must review is set by the instructor of the course.
I reviewed my peers’ assignments! What happens next?
While you’re reviewing your peers’ assignments, they’ll review yours. If you submit your assignment on time, you’ll get your grade within a week, as long as at least one peer reviews
your assignment. If you submit late, you’ll need all of the peer reviews the instructor requires. Learn more about Peer Graded Assignments. 
How are grades calculated?
You and your classmates will be asked to provide a score for each part of the assignment. Final grades are calculated by combining the median scores you received for each section.
What kind of feedback should I give?
Use the instructor’s criteria in the rubric to grade honestly and fairly. If your peers’ answers are excellent, score them highly and tell them what they did well. If their answers aren’t as
good, give the score they deserve, and be sure to provide respectful, useful feedback 
 so they can do better next time they attempt the assignment.
Is there a penalty for submitting my work late?
No, but it’s important to submit your work as close to the due date as you can. Classmates grade most of the assignments within three days of the due date. If you submit yours too
late, there may not be anyone to review your work.
If I fail an assignment, can I try again?
Yes! You can always try again, but you’ll need to resubmit your work as soon as possible to make sure your classmates have enough time to grade your work.
Can I edit my assignment?
Yes, but you’ll need to re-submit your work and any grade you’ve already received will be deleted.
Course 2 of Specialization
Creative Writing: The Craft of Character
Wesleyan University
Speaking to inform: Discussing complex ideas with clear explanations and dynamic slides
University of Washington
