Finance Course Syllabus (3 credit hours)
（1）Teacher: Lily Yan, Email: llyanll@163.com
(2) Q&A time and place: every Thursday morning, session 1-2, College Building 3, 204.
(3) Composition of grades: tentatively 30% for regular grades + 70% for the final
examination. Adjustments will be made according to the actual situation if there is an
epidemic.
Course name: Finance
This course consists of 20 chapters, which take the open economy as the environment
and the real economy as the basis, and derive the supply and demand of finance from the
financial activities of each economic entity; clarify the correlation among the basic elements,
such as money, credit and its price; take financial institutions and financial markets as the
carriers, and explain the basic principles of financial operation; and take the interest rate as the
link connecting the microfinance and macrofinance, and explain the mechanism of its action;
Taking financial aggregate and structural equilibrium as the goal, discussing the theory and
practice of macrofinance; taking macro-control and financial regulation as the guarantee,
studying the soundness and efficiency of financial development. The basic logic of the entire
course can be represented in figure 1, which can be further divided into six modules:
Figure 1 Basic Logic Diagram of the Program
Module 1 Introduction Unit 1 Finance in life: from the financial activities of economic
agents
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. To understand the role of finance in socio-economic development;
2. To understand the financial activities of various economic agents and the relationship
between residents, non-financial enterprises, and governmental and other sectors and
financial institutions;
3. Master the basic components of the modern financial system.
Keynote content:
Introduction Financial transactions of socio-economic agents and their relationships
Section 1: Residents' Financial Management and Finance
Section 2: Financial Activities of Enterprises and Finance
Section 3: Government's Financial Income and Expenditure and Finance
Section 4: Basic components of a modern financial system
Module 2: Basic Scope of Finance Unit 1 Money and Monetary System
Teaching objectives and requirements
1, to understand the history of the emergence and development of money, to understand
the doctrine of the origin of money in China and abroad, to master Marx's doctrine of the
origin of money; to understand the evolution of the form of money, to recognize the
characteristics of the various forms of money, focusing on mastery of the form of credit
money and its characteristics;
2. Master the basic functions of money in the modern economy, understand the various
roles of money, and understand the controversy between currency neutrality and
non-neutrality
3, understand the significance and basis of the division of monetary hierarchy, understand
the content of the division of the monetary hierarchy of Western countries, focusing on
mastering the division of the monetary hierarchy of China; master the relevant concepts
of monetary measurement and statistical analysis of the economic significance;
4. Master the meaning of the monetary system and understand the composition of the
monetary system;
5, master the main types of national monetary system, understand the evolution of the
national monetary system; understand China's current monetary system, master the
issuance of RMB procedures;
6. To understand the evolution of the international monetary system, to master the content
of the Jamaican system; to understand the formation and development process of the
regional monetary system, to understand the European Monetary Union and several other
major regional monetary system.
Keynote content:
Section 1 - The Emergence of Money and the Evolution of the Forms of Money
Section 2 - The Functions and Role of Money
Section 3 - Hierarchy and Measurement of Contemporary Credit Money
Section 4: The Monetary System
Module 2: Fundamental Areas of Finance Unit 2 Exchange Rates and Exchange Rate
Systems
Teaching objectives and requirements
1, understand the meaning of foreign exchange, master the concept of exchange rates and
the types of exchange rates;
2. Understand the determinants of exchange rates under different currency regimes and
grasp the main elements of various exchange rate theories;
3. Understand the main effects of exchange rates in the economy and the conditions under
which they work, and understand exchange rate risk and its manifestations;
4. Understand the content and characteristics of different exchange rate regimes;
understand the evolution of the exchange rate regime, focusing on the institutional
arrangements for the RMB exchange rate and its changes.
Keynote content:
Section 1 - Foreign Exchange and Exchange Rates
Section 2 - Theories of exchange rate determination
Section 3 - Effects of Exchange Rates and Exchange Rate Risk
Section 4: Arrangements and Evolution of Exchange Rate Regimes
Module 2: Basic Scope of Finance Unit 3 Credit and Credit Systems
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. To grasp the different meanings of credit and the relationship between credit and
money; to understand the relationship between credit, money, and the formation of
financial categories;
2. To understand the history of the emergence and development of credit and its
evolution, and to grasp the characteristics and role of usurious credit;
3. Master the basis and characteristics of modern credit activities, understand the
relationship between the modern economy and credit, and understand credit risk and its
impact;
4. To understand the types and characteristics of forms of credit, and to understand the
forms of credit and their development in China;
5. Understand the composition of the modern credit system and the construction and
development of China's credit system.
Keynote content:
Section 1 - Overview of credit
Section 2. Forms of Credit
Section 3. Credit systems
Module 2: Fundamental Areas of Finance Unit 4 Time Value of Money and Interest
Rates
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. Understand the source of interest from the substance, and understand the relationship
of interest to the time value of money and the law of capitalization of earnings;
2, master the two methods of calculating interest, master the classification of interest rate
and its relationship with the rate of return;
3. Understand the determinants of interest rates and master the theory of interest rate
determination; master other factors affecting changes in interest rates;
4, grasp the general role of interest rates, understand the role of interest rates in the
environment and conditions; understand the significance of the marketization of interest
rates in China and the process.
Keynote content:
Section 1: Time Value of Money and Interest
Section 2: Classification of interest rates and their relationship with the rate of return
Section 3: Determination of Interest Rates and its Influencing Factors
Section 4 The role of interest rates and its performance
Module 2: Fundamental Areas of Finance Unit 5 Financial Assets and Prices
Teaching objectives and requirements
1, grasp the meaning and classification of financial instruments and financial assets,
understand the relationship between the return and risk of financial assets, understand the
allocation and combination of financial assets;
2, master the price of financial assets and its types, understand the basic methods of
financial asset value assessment
3. Understand the principles of financial asset pricing;
4. Understand the relationship between financial asset prices and interest rates and
exchange rates.
Keynote content:
Section 1: Financial Instruments and Financial Assets
Section 2: Prices of Financial Assets
Section 3: Pricing of Financial Assets
Section 4: Relationship between Financial Asset Prices and Interest Rates and Exchange
Rates
Module 3: Financial Markets Unit 1 Financial Markets and Financial Structure
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. To understand the relationship between investment and financing activities and
financial markets and the current status of financial investment development;
2. To understand the types and causes of international capital flows and the role of
international financial markets in the process of economic development;
3, master the classification of the financial market and the components of the financial
market, to understand the history of the development of the financial market system, the
composition of the financial market system and the development and current situation of
China's financial market system;
4. Master the functions of financial markets and understand the conditions under which
financial markets function.
Keynote content:
Section 1: Overview of investment and financing activities and international capital flows
Section 2: Classification of Financial Markets and Their Components
Section 3. Functions of Financial Markets and Their Utilization
Module 3: Financial Markets Unit 2 Money Markets
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. Master the characteristics and functions of the money market;
2, grasp the meaning of interbank lending, understand the function of the interbank
lending market, understand the varieties of interbank lending and interest rate
characteristics, understand the development of China's interbank lending market;
3, grasp the meaning of repurchase agreement and reverse repurchase agreement,
understand the function of the repurchase agreement market, understand the difference
between interbank lending and repurchase agreement, understand the participants of the
repurchase agreement,
varieties
and
interest
rate
characteristics,
understand
the
development of China's repurchase agreement market;
4, understand the function, characteristics and issuance of treasury bills, understand the
development of China's treasury bill market;
5, grasp the meaning of commercial paper, banker's acceptances, understand the issuance
and circulation of commercial paper, understand the meaning of bill discounting,
rediscounting, rediscounting, understand the development of China's central bank notes;
6. Grasp the characteristics and functions of large negotiable time deposits, understand
the reasons for the emergence and development of the large negotiable time deposit
market, and understand the development of China's large negotiable time deposit market;
7. Understand the meaning of the international money market, understand the history of
the emergence and development of the European money market, understand the London
interbank lending market and LIBOR interest rates, and the European commercial paper
market.
Keynote content:
Section 1: Characteristics and Functions of the Money Market
Section 2: Interbank Lending Market
Section 3: Repurchase Agreement Market
Section 4: Treasury Bill Market
Section 5: Note Market
Section 6: Large Negotiable Time Deposit Market
Section 7: International Currency Market
Module 3: Financial Markets Unit 3 Capital Markets
Teaching objectives and requirements
1, grasp the meaning, characteristics and functions of the capital market, understand the
development of China's capital market;
2, understand the participants in the securities issuance market, master the advantages and
disadvantages of different securities issuance methods, understand the conditions for the
issuance of stocks and bonds;
3. Understand the functions of the different participants in the securities circulation
market and the procedures of securities trading, and grasp the characteristics of the
organization of securities circulation;
4. Understand the main methods of capital market investment analysis;
5. Understand the meaning and measurement of the internationalization of the capital
market, understand the development history and evolution trend of the major
international
capital
markets,
master
the
trend
and
characteristics
of
the
internationalization of China's capital market, and understand the coping strategies of
internationalization risks.
Keynote content:
Section 1 - Overview of Capital Markets
Section 2 - Securities Issuance and Distribution Markets
Section 3 Investment Analysis of Capital Markets
Section 4 - Internationalization of Capital Markets
Module 3: Financial Markets Unit 4 Derivatives Markets
Teaching objectives and requirements
1, grasp the meaning and classification of derivatives, grasp the meaning, characteristics
and types of derivatives such as convertible bonds, warrants, forwards, futures, swaps,
etc., grasp the basic characteristics of derivatives, understand the emergence of
derivatives and the course of development of derivatives, understand the development of
derivatives in China;
2, master the meaning and role of forward foreign exchange transactions, master the
meaning and function of the forward interest rate agreement;
3, grasp the difference and connection between futures trading and forward trading,
understand the process of futures trading, understand the main futures markets at home
and abroad;
4. Master the characteristics and functions of options trading;
5. Understand the principles of swap trading and master the functions of swap trading;
6. Understand the principles of derivatives pricing.
Keynote content:
Section1 - Overview of Derivatives
Section 2 - Derivatives Markets and Trading
Section 3 - Pricing of Derivatives
Module 4: Financial Institutions Unit 1 System of Financial Institutions
1. To understand the emergence of financial institutions and to recognize the reasons for
their existence;
2. Understand the main classifications of financial institutions;
3. To master the main functions of financial institutions and to understand the operational
peculiarities of financial institutions;
4. To master the operating system of financial institutions and its evolution;
5, to understand the general composition of the financial institutions system and
development trend, to understand the current financial institutions system in mainland
China, to recognize the characteristics of the development of financial institutions in
Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan;
4. To grasp the composition of the system of international financial institutions and to
understand the role of the major international financial institutions.
Keynote content:
Section 1: The emergence and functions of financial institutions
Section 2: Composition and Development of the Financial Institution System
Section 3: China's Financial Institutions System
Module 4: Financial Institutions Unit 2 Depository Financial Institutions
Teaching objectives and requirements
1, by recognizing the emergence and development of depository financial institutions,
grasp the banking industry overview, and understand the types of depository financial
institutions.
2. Recognize the similarities and differences between depository financial institutions and
banking financial institutions.
3, know the main forms of organization and organizational structure of commercial
banks, master the main business content of commercial banks, and understand the content
and methods of business management of commercial banks.
4. Recognize the characteristics and types of policy banks, understand the business
operations of policy banks, and grasp the role of policy banks in economic development.
Keynote content:
Section1 - Types of Depository Financial Institutions and Principles of Operation
Section 2 - Commercial Banks
Section 3 - Policy Banks
Module 4: Financial Institutions Unit 3 Non-Depository Financial Institutions
Teaching objectives and requirements
1.
Recognize
the
similarities
and
differences
between
non-depository
financial
institutions and non-bank financial institutions.
2. To recognize and understand the operating characteristics and role of insurance
companies and their development trends.
3. Understand the main business of a securities firm and its main role.
4. Understand the characteristics and role of investment fund management companies,
and master the main types of investment funds and operating principles.
5. Understand and master the operational characteristics, role and main types of business
of trust companies and financial leasing companies.
6. Understand the profile of other non-depository financial institutions such as financial
guarantee companies and automobile financial service companies.
Keynote content:
Section 1. Types and development conditions of non-depository financial institutions
Section 2. Investment Financial Institutions
Section 3. Insurance Financial Institutions
Section 4: Other Non-Depository Financial Institutions
Module IV: Financial Institutions Unit 4 Central Banks
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. To recognize and understand, as a whole, the emergence and development of central
banks and their position and role in the market economy.
2. Recognize the types of central banking system and grasp the nature and functions of
central banks.
3. Recognize the asset-liability relationship of the central bank, and master the structure
and analysis of the balance sheet of the central bank.
4. Combined with the basic principles of central banking, deeply understand the status
and role of China's central bank in economic development.
5. Understand the formation and development of central bank clearing operations, master
the meaning of central bank clearing operations, types and role of payment clearing
system.
Keynote content:
Section 1. Evolution and Types of Central Banks
Section 2. Nature and Functions of Central Banks
Section 3. Business operations of the Central Bank
Section 4: Operational norms of the Central Bank and its relationship with different
parties
Module 5: Money Supply, Demand and Equilibrium Unit 1 Demand for Money
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. To understand the meaning of money demand; to understand that money demand is
influenced and constrained by a series of factors: to understand the macro- and
micro-analytical perspectives of money demand; to grasp the nominal and real money
demand; and to grasp the quantitative and structural aspects of money demand;
2. Master the background, framework, conclusions and policy ideas of the major theories
of money demand; master the theoretical development and evolution;
3, to understand the characteristics of China's demand for money before the reform and
opening up; to master the characteristics of China's demand for money after the reform
and opening up and the main factors affecting it; to understand the trend of China's
money circulation velocity.
Keynote content:
Section1 - Meaning and Analytical Perspective of Money Demand
Section-2 Development of Money Demand Theory
Section 3 Analysis of China's Money Demand
Module 5: Money Supply, Demand and Equilibrium Unit 2 Money Supply
Teaching objectives and requirements
1, master the modern credit money supply mechanism and economic mechanism;
understand the supply process links, characteristics, the main economic agents involved;
2, master deposit reserves, the role of base money; deep understanding and master the
central bank to put and control the main ways and means of base money; understanding
and deposit reserves, compared with the central bank can be more effective in regulating
the mechanism of base money;
3. To master the mechanism of creating money in commercial banks and deposits;
4. Deep understanding and knowledge of the basic model of money supply, the money
multiplier and the factors affecting it;
5. Understand the quantitative limits and control of the money supply; understand the
endogenous and exogenous aspects of the money supply;
6. Combined with data analysis, understand the main ways and characteristics of China's
base money injection and regulation in recent years; understand the growth trend of
China's money multiplier and the influencing factors.
Keynote content:
Section1 - The Supply of Modern Credit Money
Section 2 - Base money
Section 3 - Commercial Banks and the Creation of Deposit Money
Section 4 - The Monetary Multiplier and the Money Supply
Section 5 -Quantity Bounds and Control of the Money Supply
Module 5: Money Supply, Demand and Equilibrium Unit 3 Monetary Equilibrium
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. Understand the economic meaning of money supply and demand equilibrium and
imbalance; grasp the link between money supply and demand equilibrium and aggregate
supply and demand equilibrium;
2. To master the content of the main balance of payments accounts, the main methods and
principles of balance of payments statistics; to understand the performance of balance of
payments equilibrium, its causes, response and regulation; to master the impact of
balance of payments imbalance on the supply and demand of money, aggregate supply
and demand; to understand the management of international reserve assets;
3. To master the characteristics, classification and measurement of inflation; to
understand the socio-economic impact of inflation; to understand the Phillips curve and
its policy implications; to master the causes and management of inflation;
4. Master the characteristics, classification and measurement of deflation; understand the
socio-economic impact of deflation; understand the causes and management of deflation
and inflation;
5, combined with data analysis, understanding of China's occurrence of several
significant inflation, deflation, the main causes, impact and governance.
Keynote content:
Section 1. Monetary supply and demand equilibrium and aggregate supply and demand
equilibrium
Section 2. Balance of Payments and its Equilibrium
Section 3: Monetary Equilibrium in an Open Economy
Section 4: Inflation
Section 5: Deflation
Module 6: Financial Regulation and Supervision Unit 1 Monetary Policy
Teaching objectives and requirements
1, grasp the framework of monetary policy, understand the mechanism of monetary
policy regulation; understand the formation of monetary policy objectives, the main
content and the relationship between the objectives, grasp the choice of China's monetary
policy objectives;
2. Understand operational and intermediary indicators of monetary policy; understand
and analyze financial variables that can be used as operational and intermediary
indicators of monetary policy; grasp the choice of operational and intermediary indicators
of monetary policy in China;
3. Recognize and understand the types and meanings of monetary policy tools; analyze
and understand the advantages and limitations of these tools; grasp the history and
evolution of China's choice of monetary policy tools;
4. Understand the theoretical analysis of the monetary policy transmission mechanism
and the main links; understand the definition of the time lag of monetary policy and the
influence of the effect; recognize the basic situation of China's monetary policy
transmission mechanism;
5. Understand the commonalities and differences between monetary policy and fiscal
policy, and understand the coordination of the two; analyze the cooperation and effects of
monetary policy and fiscal policy in different economic backgrounds and development
stages in China.
Keynote content:
Section 1: Mechanisms and Objectives of Monetary Policy
Section 2: Operational and Intermediary Indicators of Monetary Policy
Section 3: Monetary Policy Tools
Section 4: Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism
Section 5: Coordination between Monetary Policy and Fiscal Policy
Module 6: Financial Regulation and Supervision Unit 2 Financial Regulation
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. Recognize the concept of financial regulation, understand the necessity and role of
financial regulation; master the objectives, principles and composition of the system of
financial regulation;
2. Understand the characteristics and types of financial risks and analyze the relationship
between financial regulation and financial risks; understand the relationship between
financial regulation and financial innovation;
3. Understand the types and historical changes of financial regulatory systems, master
and analyze the financial regulatory systems of the United States, the United Kingdom
and Japan; master and analyze the development and evolution of China's financial
regulatory system;
4. Recognize and appreciate the main means and methods of financial regulation, and
understand the necessity and main content of the regulation of the banking, securities and
insurance industries.
Keynote content:
Section1- Principles of financial regulation
Section 2. Institutions of financial regulation
Section 3. Enforcement of financial regulation
Module 6: Financial Regulation and Supervision Unit 3 Financial Development
Teaching objectives and requirements
1. To understand the relationship between financial development and economic
development, and to analyze the determination of economic development on financial
development and the important position and driving role of financial development in
economic development;
2. Understand the possible adverse effects of financial activities on economic
development, and analyze the emergence and destructiveness of adverse effects from
three aspects: uncontrolled financial aggregates, high risks in the financial sector and
excessive financial innovation;
3, master the meaning and main performance of financial innovation, analyze the causes
of financial innovation; and understand the contemporary financial innovation on
economic development to promote the role of negative effects and challenges;
4. Understand the meaning and manifestations of financial structure and the conditions
underlying its formation;
Keynote content:
Section 1. Financial development and economic development
Section 2. Financial innovation and financial development
Section 3. Financial structure and financial development
