1 
 
 
Syllabus(2018-1) 
 
Course Title 
 Financial 
Management 
Course No. 
22250 
Department/Major 
Business 
Administration 
Credit 
3 
Class Time/ 
Classroom 
Tue 6th(3:30~4:45), Thu 4th(12:30~1:45) / SHINSEGAE 209 
Instructor 
Name: Yoon-Kyung Yuh 
Department: Business Administration 
E-mail: yuhyk@ewha.ac.kr 
Telephone: 3277-4076 
Office Hours/ 
Office Location 
Tue 1:30~3:30, Thu 2:00~4:00 / SHINSEGAE 425 
 
I. 
Course Overview 
This course lays the foundation for more advanced investment and corporate finance courses, and it will also 
familiarize you with the financial markets through discussions of current events, articles, and trends. This course is 
about how to efficiently raise funds necessary for business management and manage surplus funds. Main lecture 
contents include financial accounting, working capital management, capital budgeting, cost of capital, capital 
structure, and capital market theory. 
 
None 
 
 
Lecture 
Discussion/Presentation 
Experiment/Practicum 
Field Study 
Other 
80 % 
20 % 
% 
% 
* explanation of course format): The lectures are centered around the professor's lectures, with a secondary discussion method 
to help students understand. 
 
This course serves as an introduction to business finance. 
In line with the core learning traits, the objectives of this course are: 
- 
to introduce a framework, concepts, and tools for analyzing financial decisions based on fundamental 
principles of modern financial theory. 
- 
to provide methods of financing and investing capital, with the emphasis on financial statements 
and cash flow, discounted cash flow techniques, bond and stock valuation, capital budgeting and 
investment decisions, cost of capital, and capital market theory. 
 
1. Course Description 
2. Prerequisites 
3. Course Format 
4. Course Objectives 
5. Evaluation System 
2 
 
 
 
Midterm Exam 
Final Exam 
Quizzes 
Presentation 
Projects 
Assignments 
Participation 
Other 
25 % 
25 % 
40 % 
% 
% 
% 
10 % 
% 
* Explanation of evaluation system: Midterm and final exams are conducted 1 time each, and quizzes are conducted 4 times (10% per 
session). Participation is detrimental to attendance. If you are absent from school for more than 1/3 of the total class time (3 hours per 
week (3 hours)×15 weeks ÷3 = 15 hours (= 10 times), you will be treated as F (school rules). 
II. Course Materials and Additional Readings 
 
Ross, Westerfield, Jordan, Wong, R. and Wong, B. Essentials of Corporate Finance. Asia Global Edition, 
McGraw-Hill. 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
III. Course Policies
1.Required Materials 
* No make-up tests, make-up quizzes, or make-up assignments. 
* Attendance (participation) criteria: No points will be deducted for up to 2 absences, and 2 latecomings will be equivalent to 1 absence. 
* In the case of (1) and (2) of the 'reasons and evidence' below,  the decision can be made after consulting with the professor in charge within 7 
days of the occurrence of the reason. 
In the cases of (3) and (4), if you are expected to miss more than 5 times due to the prospect of being employed during the semester 
(prospective employment, participation in training/training/educational practice, etc.),  it is not recommended to take this class. 
* Reasons and evidence for absenteeism (original submission, the reason for absence must be submitted in the first class after absence, 
and will not be accepted thereafter) 
(1) Illness: A medical certificate issued by the director of the university's affiliated hospital or the equivalent general hospital director 
(2) Death of a lineal descendant: Certificate of family relationship and death certificate 
(3) Participation in international competitions, training, training, educational practice, etc.: Proof of the name of the head of the host 
organization 
(1) Only official documentary evidence of the name of the head of the organization hosting the external official event is accepted. 
(2) A request for class recognition cooperation (official letter) issued by an individual or department cannot be accepted as proof. 
(4) In other cases where the Chancellor deems it necessary and approves it: Applicable supporting documents. 
- When a student who is employed during the school period is required to go to work 
- When a student who is employed during the period of enrollment participates in internships, corporate training, and education. 
- When a prospective employee participates in activities (interviews, internships, etc.) that are essential for employment. 
- When participating in an official event at the request of a public institution 
- In the event that the university to which you belong deems it necessary and has obtained the permission of the president 
 
2. Supplementary Materials 
3. Optional Additional Readings 
3 
 
 
 
IV. Course Schedule 
Week 
Date 
 Topics & Class Materials, Assignments 
Week 1 
March 6 (Tue) 
Ch.01 Introduction to Financial Management 
Thursday, March 8 
Ch.01 Introduction to Financial Management 
Week 2 
March 13 (Tue) 
Ch.02 Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow 
Thursday, March 15 
Ch.02 Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow 
Week 3 
March 20 (Tue) 
Ch.02 Financial Statements, Taxes, and Cash Flow 
Thursday, March 22 
Ch.03 Working with Financial Statements 
Week 4 
Tuesday, March 27 
Ch.03 Working with Financial Statements 
Thursday, March 29 
Ch.03 Working with Financial Statements, Quiz 1 (Ch.1~Ch.3) 
Week 5 
Tuesday, April 3 
Ch.04 Introduction to Valuation 
Thursday, April 5 
Ch.04 Introduction to Valuation 
Week 6 
Tuesday, April 10 
Ch.05 Discounted Cash Flow Valuation 
Thursday, April 12 
Ch.05 Discounted Cash Flow Valuation 
Week 7 
Tuesday, April 17 
Ch.06 Interest Rates & Bond Valuation 
Thursday, April 19 
Ch.06 Interest Rates & Bond Valuation 
Week 8 
Tuesday, April 24 
Ch.06 Interest Rates & Bond Valuation, Quiz 2 (Ch.4~Ch.6) 
Thursday, April 26 
Mid-term Exam (Ch.1~Ch.6) 
Week 9 
May 1 (Tue) 
Ch.07 Equity Market & Stock Valuation 
Thursday, May 3 
Ch.07 Equity Market & Stock Valuation 
Week 
10 
Tuesday, May 8 
Ch.08 Net Present Value & Other Investment Criteria 
Thursday, May 10 
Ch.08 Net Present Value & Other Investment Criteria 
Week 
11 
Tuesday, May 15 
Ch.09 Making Capital Investment Decisions 
Thursday, May 17 
Ch.09 Making Capital Investment Decisions 
Week 
12 
May 22 (Tue) 
Public Holiday 
Thursday, May 24 
Ch.09 Making Capital Investment Decisions, Quiz 3 (Ch.7~Ch.9) 
Week 
13 
Tuesday, May 29 
Ch.10 Some Lessons from Capital Market History 
Thursday, May 31 
Ch.11 Risk & Return 
Week 
14 
Tuesday, June 5 
Ch.11 Risk & Return 
Thursday, June 7 
Ch.12 Cost of Capital 
Week 
15 
Tuesday, June 12 
Ch.12 Cost of Capital 
Thursday, June 14 
Ch.12 Cost of Capital, Quiz 4 (Ch.10~Ch.12) 
Week 
16 
Tuesday, June 19 
Final Exam (Ch.7~Ch.12) 
March 6 (Tue) 
4 
 
 
* * In accordance with Article 57 of the Academic Regulations, students with disabilities may request teaching and learning support regarding attendance, lectures, 
assignments, and examinations through a meeting with the professor in charge of the subject in the first week of the semester, and may receive support through 
the professor in charge or the Disability Student Support Center. Examples of possible types of support for lectures, assignments, and assessments include: 
 
- 실제 지원 내용은 강의 특성에 따라 달라질 수 있습니다. 
* According to the University regulation section #57, students with disabilities can request for special accommodations related to attendance, lectures, 
assignments, or tests by contacting the course professor at the beginning of semester. Based on the nature of the students’ request, students can receive 
support for such accommodations from the course professor or from the Support Center for Students with Disabilities (SCSD). Please refer to the below 
examples of the types of support available in the lectures, assignments, and evaluations. 
- Actual support may vary depending on the course. 
V. Special Accommodations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ESB Mission: To generate and disseminate knowledge to advance the understanding, practice and 
management of business while seeking to be a recognized leader in a high-quality business education. 
⚫ To play a leading role in the development of ideas that shapes the world of business and management. 
⚫  To prepare future women leaders of business, education and public services by delivering the quality 
education. 
ESB AoL Learning Goals and Traits: In addition to the course objectives listed below, students should 
expect to develop the following by end of the course: 
⚫ Learning Goal : Management Knowledge: Students will demonstrate that they have adequate business specific 
knowledge and understanding. 
AoL Trait # 6-1: Acquisition of adequate knowledge of basic business principles in Finance. 
ESB Code of Ethics: To promote the growth of ethically responsible women leaders at ESB through adherence 
to the highest standards of academic integrity and overall ethical conduct, and to develop a sense of individual 
responsibility to maintain such standards. 
⚫  Code of Ethics for Faculty: ESB faculty must teach students with good faith, maintain transparency in grading, and 
faithfully conduct student counseling. 
⚫  Code of Ethics for Students: ESB student is expected to represent her academic product honestly and fairly, 
and to respect the individual rights of others. 
 
The contents of this syllabus are not final—they may be updated. 
 
Lecture-related 
Assignment-related 
Regarding Assessment 
Visually impaired: Braille, enlarged data 
provided 
Hearing impairment: Placement of 
ghostwriting assistant 
 Retardation: Wheelchair accessible 
classrooms 
Provide, ghostwriter placement 
Extension of submission date, 
provision of alternative 
assignments 
Visual impairment: Braille, audio test papers 
provided, test time extended, 
ghostwriting assistant arranged 
Hearing impairment: Oral examination is 
conducted as a written assessment. 
 Retardation disorder: Extension of test time, 
placement of ghostwriting assistant 
Lecture 
Assignments 
Evaluation 
․ Visual impairment : braille, enlarged 
reading materials 
․ Hearing impairment : note-taking 
assistant 
․ Physical impairment : access to classroom, 
note-taking assistant 
Extra days for submission, 
alternative assignments 
․ Visual impairment : braille examination paper, 
examination with voice support, longer examination 
hours, note-taking assistant 
․ Hearing impairment : written examination 
instead of oral 
․ Physical impairment : longer examination 
hours, note-taking assistant 
