- 1 -
FENG CHIA UNIVERSITY
Money and Banking
GMIF207, Summer 2022 (May 9 - June 10)
Lecturer: Zeyu Zhang
Email:TBA
Contact hours: 60 (50 minutes each)
Credits: 4
Office hours: 2 hours (according to the teaching schedule)
Course Description
This course covers monetary policy, banking and bank regulation, and the functioning
of financial markets and institutions. We examine the interconnections between these
elements in an open world economy where goods and capital move freely across
borders. Major attention will be given to banking and financial crises, their origins
and resolution, looking both at the US and other countries. We look at financial
structure, financial development and financial crises, with special emphasis on the
recent subprime crisis. In addition, we will cover the economics of bank management,
along with the effects of the behavior of individual financial institutions on the
financial system as a whole and on the economy as a whole.
The course will also cover the theory and practice of monetary policy using the
Federal Reserve Bank of the US as our main example. We will cover issues of central
bank independence, goals of monetary policy, control of the money supply and tools
used by central banks, and issues of tactics and strategy. Consideration will also be
GMIF207 Money and Banking
- 2 -
given to monetary policy in conditions of deep recession and deflation, quantitative
easing and unconventional monetary policy instruments in the most recent crisis.
Discussion of money demand and the transmission mechanism is also presented while
looking at debates on these crucial issues for central banks.
Required Text
The Economics of Money, Banking and Financial Markets, Frederic Mishkin, (The
Pearson Series in Economics), 11th Edition (2015). ISBN-13: 978-0133836790
Grading Policy
Your semester grade will be based on homework and exams.
Homework:
Five Assignments
5% * 5 = 25%
Mid-term Exams:
Two Exams
20% * 2 = 40%
Final Exam (Comprehensive):
One Final
35%
TOTAL
100%
Homework:
There will be FIVE HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENTS during the semester. For each
homework assignment, there will be 20 “True” or “False” or “Multiple Choice”
questions. I will post each homework assignment on the online learning system. Each
assignment accounts for 5% of your semester grade. Therefore, this part accounts for
25% of your semester grade.
Exams:
There will be TWO MID-TERM EXAMS in this course. Each midterm exam is
worth 20% of your semester grade. Totally, this part accounts for 40% of your
semester grade. ONE FINAL EXAM will be scheduled in the end of the semester.
The final exam is both cumulative and comprehensive. This part will be worth 35% of
your semester grade.
GMIF207 Money and Banking
- 3 -
Grading System of FCU
Letter Grade
Scores
A+
90-100
A
85-89
A-
80-84
B+
77-79
B
73-76
B-
70-72
C+
67-69
C
63-66
C-
60-62
D
40-59
E
1-39
X
0
Course Schedule
Date
Topics
HWK Exams
Week I
Why Study Money, Banking, and Financial Markets? (CH 1) An
Overview of the Financial System (CH 2)
What is Money? (CH 3)
HWK 1
Week II
The Meaning of Interest Rates (CH 4) The Behavior of Interest Rates
(CH 5)
The Risk and Term Structure of Interest Rates (CH 6)
HWK 2 Exam 1
(CH 1 to
CH 6)
Week III An Economic Analysis of Financial Structure (CH 8) Banking and the
Management of Financial Institutions (CH 9) Economic Analysis of
Financial Regulation (CH 10)
Banking Industry: Structure and Competition (CH 11)
HWK 3
GMIF207 Money and Banking
- 4 -
Week VI
Central Banks and the Federal Reserve System (CH 13) The Money
Supply Process (CH 14)
Tools of Monetary Policy (CH 15)
The Conduct of Monetary Policy: Strategy and Tactics (CH 16)
HWK 4
Exam 2
(CH 8 to
CH 16)
Week V
Quantity Theory, Inflation, and the Demand for Money (CH 19) The
IS Curve (CH 20)
The Monetary Policy & Aggregate Demand (CH 21)
HWK 5
Final
(Cumulative)
Academic Honesty
Feng Chia University defines academic misconduct as any act by a student that
misrepresents the students’ own academic work or that compromises the academic
work of another scholastic misconduct. This includes (but is not limited to) cheating
on assignments or examinations; plagiarizing, i.e. misrepresenting as one’s own work
any work done by another; submitting the same paper, or substantially similar papers,
to meet the requirements of more than one course without the approval and consent of
the instructors concerned; sabotaging another’s work within these general definitions.
However, instructors determine what constitutes academic misconduct in the courses
they teach. Students found guilty of academic misconduct in any portion of the
academic work face penalties ranging from lowering of their course grade to awarding
a grade of E for the entire course.
