St. Thomas University 
Department of Business Administration 
 
Course Syllabus 
FIN 751: Financial Management 
Term A6: (August 15th – October 10th) 
Instructor: Kevin Brady 
Class times: Tuesday 6:00-10:00pm 
Office Phone: 305-474-6942 
Cell Phone:  561-213-0841 
Email: kbrady@stu.edu 
Office: O’mailia Hall 
Class Room: O’mailia 6 
Office Hours: Tuesday 2:45-5:45pm or by appointment 
Required Textbook: Moyer, R.C., McGuigan, J. R., & Rao, R. (2018). Contemporary financial management (14th ed.). 
Mason, OH: Cengage-Southwestern. 
Prerequisites: ACC 500, ECO 500 and BUS 500 or equivalents 
 
Course Information 
Course Description 
This course covers budgeting, methods for analyzing financial statements, capital budgeting, and methods for financing. 
Course Learning Outcomes 
Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to: 
1. Understand the role of finance and the financial manager in the firm. 
2. Understand the legal, operating, and tax environment for the firm. 
3. Understand the basic forms of business, marketing, and interest rates. 
4. Understand the basic financial statements, depreciation, and cash flow and analysis of the firm’s funds flow. 
5. Analyze financial statements, including the use of financial ratios, cross-sectional analysis, and time series 
analysis. 
6. Understand the financial planning process, including budgets and methods of pro-forma statement 
preparation. 
7. Understand operating, financial and total leverage, and break-even analysis. 
 
8. Understand working capital management, including the trade-off between probability and risk and a firm’s 
financing mix based on an aggressive or conservative approach. 
9. Examine sources of short-term financing and consideration of alternative financing sources. 
10. Compute the time value of money, compound interest, future value, annual and intra-year compounding, 
nominal and effective rates of interest, and present value. 
11. Evaluate the characteristics of capital budgeting. 
12. Examine sources of long-term financing. 
 
Program Learning Outcomes 
Upon successful completion of this program, students will be able to: 
 
1. Apply a balance of quantitative and qualitative concepts to executive decision-making cases. 
 
2. Apply critical thinking skills acquired from exposure to specific functional theories and practices to strategic 
organizational issues. 
 
3. Express ideas and recommendations in a concise and professional fashion by utilizing their enhanced verbal, 
analytical, and writing skills to solve case studies. 
 
Schedule 
Note: Chapters refer to those in the required text, Moyer, R.C., McGuigan, J. R., & Rao, R. (2018). Contemporary financial 
management (14th ed.). Mason, OH: Cengage-Southwestern. 
8/15:  Chapters 1 and 2 
8/22:  Chapters 3 and 4 
8/29:  Chapters 5 and 6 
9/5:   
Chapters 7 and 8 
9/12: 
 Midterm;  Chapter 9 
9/19:  Chapters 10 and 11 
9/26:  Chapters 12 and 13 
10/3:  Chapters 14 and 15 
10/10:  Final Exam 
 
Grading 
Midterm: 20% 
Final: 25% 
Assignments and Participation: 10% 
WACC Project: 10% 
Comprehensive Case: 15% 
Research Paper: 15% 
 
Overall course grades will be determined according to the following scale: 
A = 93%–100%; A– = 90%-–92.99%; B+ = 87%-–89.99%; B = 83%–86.99%; B– = 80%–82.99%; C+ = 77%–79.99%; C = 73%–
76.99%; C– = 70%–72.99%; D+ = 67%–69.99%; D = 60%–66.99%; F = 0%–59.99% 
Research Project 
Library Use and Information Literacy Assignment  
Part of the expectation for this course involves students using library resources and focusing on information literacy. For 
the research project and certain assignments, students should use various mediums of information including books, e-
books, academic journals, magazines, newspapers, archival and primary source materials, audio-visual materials, and 
other electronic materials. The purpose of the library research assignment is twofold. First, it is to introduce the student 
to the wide selection of electronic research facilities available from the St. Thomas University library. Some useful 
publications are: 
Wall Street Journal 
Economist 
Business Week 
Fortune 
Journal of Finance 
Journal of Small Business Finance 
Journal of Case Management 
Journal of Financial Planning 
Journal of Portfolio Management 
Journal of Accounting, Auditing, and Finance 
Journal of Business 
Journal of Accounting Research 
Journal of Finance Research 
Journal of Political Economy 
Journal of Financial Services Research 
Journal of Financial Economics 
Journal of Banking and Finance 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 
The Financial Review 
Review of Business and Economics Research 
Akron Business and Economic Review 
International Review of Economics & Business 
National Tax Journal 
Financial Executive 
The Review of Economics and Statistics 
California Management Review Corporate Cash Flow 
The American Economic Review 
The European Economic Review 
International Economic Review 
Financial Management 
Global Finance 
Management Decision 
 
The second objective is for the student to gain an in-depth knowledge of a topic related to the course that is not 
completely covered by the lecture or the textbook. Your topic and outline is due on Week 3.  
  
There will be several topics provided to you to choose from for the research project. The paper must be at least 10 
double-spaced pages in length. You must use at least three academically reviewed electronically indexed articles from 
the St. Thomas Library databases—e.g., ABI INFORM, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE, etc., for sources. There should be a 
reasonable number of properly formatted references. More guidance will be provided during the second week of class. 
Reference Guide (Recommended) 
American Psychological Association. (2012). Publication manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author. 
 
 
COURSE STANDARDS 
STUDENT IDENTIFICATION 
Each student is responsible for protecting the secure login and pass code assigned him/her. Furthermore, the student 
may be required to participate in other designated activities that allow the University to confirm that the registered 
student participating in courses, assessments, and evaluations and being granted credits or credentials is one and the 
same person.  
 
ASSIGNMENTS AND DUE DATES 
The material for this class represents a broad range of topics that have been collected based on their relevance to you, 
both academically and professionally. The weekly topics leading to your final paper or final assessment, although 
presented in a logical manner, are a dynamic process requiring both focus and flexibility on your part and must conform 
to the following:  
1. All assignments are to be submitted in APA format. 
2. Late assignments will not be accepted. 
3. All written assignments must be double-spaced, word processed, and submitted as requested by the due dates.  
4. Students are expected to submit high-quality assignments during this course. In this regard, students should 
ensure their submissions are edited and grammatically sound. The quality of the exposition and content will 
impact the grade of each assignment and subsequently the final course grade. 
 
Format for All Course Assignments 
The required format for all course assignments (e.g., projects and research papers) is that of the American Psychological 
Association (APA). For more information about this style, see the Supplementary Readings and Resources section of the 
syllabus. If an assignment does not follow APA style, it will receive a penalty of up to a 10% grade deduction. 
Writing Across the Curriculum 
Communication in written form is one of the most important skills for a university graduate. In order to develop and 
demonstrate this skill, students’ written work will be expected to meet high standards in both content and style. 
Students will be held to the scholastic standards and policies outlined in the University Catalog.  
 
ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION 
Weekly class attendance is required to successfully complete the course. Reading assignments are to be completed prior 
to class.  Students will be expected to be prepared to discuss assignments in class. 
  
Regular class attendance is essential in this course.  Your final course grade may be reduced by one letter grade for each 
unexcused absence more than one.  You will be assigned an unexcused absence if you are late or leave early.  It is your 
responsibility to notify your professor if you have a valid reason for arriving late for class or leaving early.  This must be in 
writing or by email.   
 
Students are responsible for all the materials discussed and/or announced in class.  Students are also reminded that the 
penalties for plagiarism in any form are serious (review the Saint Thomas University Student Handbook for student 
responsibilities) and will be handled according to STU policy. 
NONPARTICIPATION  
If the student never logs on to class (online) and does not successfully initiate a course drop request, the student 
receives a UW grade. A student may also receive a UW grade by meeting the following four criteria: (1) never 
participating in Discussion forums, (2) never submitting an assignment, (3) never taking part in any assessment, and (4) 
never participating in any learning group activity. To receive course credit in the future, the student is required to re-
register for the course and pay the full course fee.  
WITHDRAWAL FROM A COURSE  
It is not true that withdrawing from a course simply means not showing up or stopping participation in that course. 
Please ensure that the policy on withdrawing from a course at St. Thomas University is clearly understood. 
 
At St. Thomas University, in order for a student to withdraw from any course, it is NOT SUFFICIENT for the student to 
stop attending class or to inform the instructor of his or her intention to withdraw. St. Thomas University’s policy states 
that any student wishing to withdraw from a course must do so formally through BASIC. Any student whose name 
appears on the final official roster for the class will receive a letter grade based on the percentage of points earned, even 
if the percentage of points is 0 and the letter grade is an F.  
 
To officially withdraw from a distance education course, students must consult with their instructor and complete the 
withdrawal forms. Students must electronically submit their forms through their academic advisors. A completed form 
must have the signature of a dean. 
 
Guidelines for Participating in All Online Course Activities 
All class activities are to be completed according to the specific due dates indicated on the course syllabus. Students are 
expected to participate fully in all discussions and to submit postings on time. Students will be assessed by the degree 
and quality of their participation (postings) in Discussions. All assignments will be submitted via Ember. 
 
NOTICE TO STUDENTS REGARDING SEVERE INCLEMENT WEATHER AND UNIVERSITY EMERGENCY CLOSINGS 
If there is a hurricane, the instructor will post and email students instructions before the storm takes him/her offline.  
If there are problems with completing assignments because of damage from hurricanes or tropical storms, the 
instructor will revise the assignment schedule as needed.   
COURSE EVALUATION 
Students are expected to complete an online evaluation at the end of the term for each course in which they were 
enrolled for a term. Evaluations are very important as they help to improve course content and provide the instructor 
with feedback on how he/she could enhance the course. Term course evaluations are available at the end of the course. 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY POLICIES 
The University trusts that each student will maintain lofty standards of honesty and ethical behavior. All assignments 
submitted in fulfillment of course requirements must be the student’s own work. Students are reminded that the 
penalties for plagiarism are very serious. Students who plagiarize will fail the course. No professional can maintain 
credibility using another’s work, whether that person is an employee, a fellow student, or a published writer. Therefore, 
our discipline requires that plagiarism in any form be dealt with severely.  
 
ACADEMIC HONESTY 
Academic honesty is highly valued at St. Thomas University. You must always submit work that represents your original 
words or ideas. If any words or ideas used in a class posting or assignment submission do not represent your original 
words or ideas, you must cite all relevant sources and make clear the extent to which such sources were used. Words or 
ideas that require citation include all hard copy or electronic publications, whether copyrighted or not, and all verbal or 
visual communication when the content of such communication clearly originates from an identifiable source. Please 
see the Student Handbook for more information about academic honesty, including consequences of academic 
dishonesty. 
 
Written assignments that include material similar to that from course reading materials or other sources should include 
a citation including source, author, and page number. Quotation marks should be used if the material is copied directly 
from the readings, and text citations should be used (for example, “Kozol, 1988, p. 22”). Following that example, if the 
material is paraphrased, “(Kozol, 1988)” should appear immediately following the paraphrased material. In addition, 
written assignments that are similar or identical to those of another student in the class are also a violation of the policy. 
The consequence for a violation of this policy is receiving 0 points for the assignment. Rewriting the assignment will not 
be an option. Finally, you may not submit the work of someone else as your own or submit work that you have 
submitted for another class. 
CITING EXTERNAL SOURCES 
A particularly important part of writing a paper is giving credit to external sources used. Failure to cite external sources 
may cause a paper to be considered not in conformance with the Academic Honesty policy as outlined in this syllabus 
and/or result in a paper being considered to contain plagiarism. Be familiar with these areas, and note that citing 
sources means having them in your references as well as where otherwise appropriate.  
 
Sources that must be cited include the following: 
 
1. Material from another source used word for word (direct quote) 
2. Material from another source with some rewording (revised quote) 
3. Material from another source put into your own words (paraphrase) 
4. Material for another course you have written 
 
Failure to cite external sources will be considered a significant lack of adherence to guidelines and will incur a penalty. 
Failure to cite sources may have profound consequences, particularly if the use of sources is considered a significant 
portion of the content of a submitted assignment.  
 
NONORIGINAL CONTENT (EVEN IF PROPERLY CITED) 
Without question, the use of external material in an assignment is strongly encouraged, as it can add value and 
supporting information. However, it is important to note that assignments should generally consist of a substantial 
amount of original material (wording and ideas). If an assignment contains an excessively large percentage of content 
that is nonoriginal, the assignment will be marked down to reflect that. As an extreme example, if an assignment 
consisted of all nonoriginal content, even if correctly cited, the assignment would be given 0 points on the basis of not 
having any original content. Therefore, please make sure your assignments have an appropriate balance between cited 
and original content. The maximum amount of properly cited, nonoriginal content allowed in each assignment is 30%.  
 
TECHNOLOGY IN ANTIPLAGIARISM 
 
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY AND PLAGIARISM DETECTION TECHNOLOGY  
St. Thomas University utilizes online plagiarism software as both a deterrent to academic dishonesty and an educational 
tool to assist students in their ability to work with and document sources of information. The plagiarism software is used 
a tool to guide professors and students on the originality of the material submitted for assignments and the 
documentation of the sources used to produce the material. 
 
Where anti-plagiarism software is used, and depending upon the assignment and the requirements of the professor for 
the assignment, 30% similarity or matching is the recommended threshold for faculty to closely review the submitted 
material to determine if a student has plagiarized. Where the use of anti-plagiarism software is absent, and there is 
reason to suspect that a student has violated the Academic Conduct Code, as it relates to plagiarism, the procedure to 
follow in both cases is the same. 
 
PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY IN THE CLASSROOM 
One of the highlights of the STU academic experience is that students can draw on the wealth of examples from their 
background or organizations in discussions and written work. However, it is imperative that students not share 
information that is confidential, privileged, or proprietary. Students must be mindful of any contracts to which they have 
agreed with their employers or others. 
STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES 
All University services are available to online students. 
 
LIBRARY SERVICES 
The University Library provides access to electronic databases and print and media resources. The best place to start is 
www.stu.edu/library for the E-RESEARCH link, as well as other important links and library services. The electronic library 
catalog will allow you to find books, government documents, videos, and other media types. Access to these collections 
and services is available with your University email authorization and password. The Library hours are posted on the 
website. The Reference Research Help Desk phone number is 305-628-6668. 
 
TECHNOLOGY SUPPORT SERVICES 
Students are responsible for acquiring and maintaining the required equipment and technological services they need to 
participate in the learning activities. For issues or problems related to University email, My Bobcat, and Ember, please 
contact: 
 
Email and My Bobcat 
Mon–Fri, 9 a.m.–5 p.m. 
STU Help Desk 
  
305-628-6610 
helpdesk@stu.edu  
 
All matters relating to usernames, 
passwords, second-term 
registration, financial aid, tuition 
fees, transcripts, PIN numbers, and 
Student IDs 
B.A.S.I.C.  
305-474-6900  
Website 
stubasic@stu.edu  
Support 
Mon–Fri, 9 a.m.–5 p.m.  
Ineabelle Colón  
Program Technical Assistant 
305-628-6702 
icolon@stu.edu  
 
UNIVERSITY WRITING CENTER 
The University Writing Center (UWC) provides writing assistance to STU students from all disciplines, both 
undergraduate and graduate. The UWC is staffed by a director and writing tutors who work one-on-one with writers at 
all stages of the writing process, from brainstorming to developing proofreading skills. To make an appointment, please 
email writingcenter@stu.edu.  
CAREER SERVICES 
The Office of Career Services is dedicated to assisting students and alumni in attaining their career goals. The Office 
specializes in combing one-on-one career advising with the latest in career-related technology, including an Internet-
based system for job openings and résumé writing/referrals. Hours can be found on the website: www.stu.edu/career.  
 
HEALTH AND WELLNESS COUNSELING SERVICES 
The Counseling Services Office serves to make a positive difference in students’ lives. They assist students in working 
through adversity and difficult life situations. The services provided are free and confidential to registered students. To 
schedule an appointment to speak with a counselor, call 305-628-6690 or email counseling@stu.edu.  
 
DISABLED STUDENT ACADEMIC SERVICES 
 
It is the intent of St. Thomas University, consistently with its obligations under the Americans with Disabilities Act and 
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, to insure equal access to quality education for its diverse student 
population. The Academic Enhancement Center provides auxiliary aids, guidance, and other academic assistance to 
students with disabilities. This assistance includes tutoring, registration help, adapted equipment (magnifiers, hand 
magnifiers, recorders, grandstands), testing accommodations, etc. For information regarding services for students with 
disabilities, contact Mrs. Maritza Rivera, Director of Academic Enhancement Services at (305) 628-6564 or by email at 
mrivera@stu.edu. 
TECHNOLOGY SPECIFICATIONS (2015–2016) 
COMPUTERS, INTERNET SERVICE, AND OTHER EQUIPMENT  
 
1. 
Students must have the ability to log on to the Internet.  
2. 
Students must have access to and use of the Microsoft Office program. 
3. 
Students must have access to and use of the Ember learning management system (LMS).  
4. 
Students must update their profile and email on Ember. Students can use only their STU email address. If you 
do not know your email address, log in to My Bobcat and click User Account.  
5. 
Students must log in to Ember a few times each week to check in and stay informed.  
6. 
Students must post specified assignments in the corresponding discussion forum or assignment, depending on 
the assignment and instructor’s request.  
7. 
Course-related questions should be posted in Discussions to benefit the entire class. 
 
The onus is on each student to safeguard his/her work in the event that technology fails. For example, students may 
back up work to an external unit, such as a USB or CD. 
 
The following table lists the required computer and Internet specifications for using the Ember LMS.+  
 
Minimum 
Internet Connection 
512K 
Bandwidth 
512 kbps 
Software 
MS Word 2000 or higher 
Processor 
(PC or Mac) 2GHz 
Operating System 
(PC) Windows XP SP3 and newer 
(Mac) Mac OSX 10.6 and newer 
(Linux) Chrome OS 
RAM 
512 MB 
Browser++ 
Upgrade your browser to the latest version:  
Chrome (PC or Mac) www.google.com/intl/en/chrome/browser/ 
Firefox (PC or Mac) www.mozilla.org/en-US/ 
Safari (Mac) support.apple.com/downloads/#internet 
Plug-ins 
 
Flash10 plug-in or newer http://get.adobe.com/flashplayer/ 
JavaScript enabled 
Peripherals 
1024 x 768 pixel resolution display  
Speakers and sound card 
 
+ STU recommends students use/purchase a computer with these standards listed at the start of their program.  
++ STU does not provide technical support for browsers other than those listed.  
 
