 
 
財務及保險學系 
Department of Finance and Insurance 
 
Course Syllabus / Outline (2015-2016) 
 
 
 
Course Title 
 
: Corporate Finance 
 
Course Code 
 
: FIN2200 
 
No. of Credits/Term 
 
: 3 
 
Mode of Tuition 
 
: Sectional Approach 
 
Teaching Hours 
 
: 42 hours (3 hours per week) 
 
Category in Major Programme 
: Stream Required - Finance Stream 
 
Prerequisite 
 
: BUS201/BUS2201 Financial Management 
 
 
Brief Course Description 
 
Building on core Financial Management course, this course further elaborates the theory and 
practice of corporate finance.  The topics addressed in this course include the concept and 
techniques of valuation of cash flows, capital budgeting decisions, risk and return, cost of 
capital, capital structure theories and decisions, dividend theories and policy, working capital 
management, and corporate restructuring. 
 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
On completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 
1. Estimate the cost of capital for the whole firm, individual divisions as well as the 
specific projects with advanced techniques such as the marginal cost of capital (MCC) 
schedule  
 
2. Solve capital budgeting problems by risk-adjusted discount rate approach and 
certainty equivalent approach 
 
3. Explain and evaluate the Modigliani and Miller (MM) capital structure model (with 
and without taxes) and the Miller model 
 
4. Describe the impact of financial distress, agency costs and asymmetric information on 
capital structure 
 
5. Explain dividend theories such as the residual theory of dividends and the Miller and 
Modigliani’s irrelevance argument 
 
6. Identify other factors that influence dividend policy 
 
 
1 
 
 
財務及保險學系 
Department of Finance and Insurance 
 
Course Syllabus / Outline (2015-2016) 
 
 
 
7. Apply the principles of working capital management 
 
8. Describe the theories and practice of corporate restructuring such as mergers, 
acquisitions, leveraged buyouts (LBOs), divestitures and spin-offs. 
 
Measurement of Learning Outcomes 
 
1. The midterm and final exam consist of largely open-end questions and workout 
problems while some objective questions may also be used 
 
2. Open-end questions assess students’ comprehension of principles and application of 
theories.  
 
3. Workout problems measure students’ mastery of financial problem-solving techniques 
and skills. 
 
4. Objective questions gauge students’ recognition of basic terms and skills. 
 
Indicative Content 
 
Review of Basic Concepts 
 
Goals of the firm and the role of the financial manager within the organisation 
Ethics and firm value 
Discounted cash flow analysis 
Valuation of securities. 
Risk and return. 
 
Cost of Capital 
 
Cost of debt, cost of preferred stock, cost of common equity and retained earnings 
Weighted average cost of capital (WACC) 
Divisional and project-specific required rates of return 
The marginal cost of capital (MCC) schedule and breaks/jumps in the MCC schedule  
 
Risk and Capital Budgeting 
 
Review of basic capital budgeting decision methods 
Risk-adjusted discount rate approach and certainty equivalent approach 
 
Capital Structure Decisions 
 
The development of capital structure theory 
The Modigliani and Miller (MM) Model with and without taxes 
The Miller Model 
 
2 
 
 
財務及保險學系 
Department of Finance and Insurance 
 
Course Syllabus / Outline (2015-2016) 
 
 
 
Criticisms of the MM and Miller Models 
The impact of financial distress, agency costs and asymmetric information 
 
Dividend Policy 
 
Dividend theories such as the Residual Theory of Dividends 
Arguments for and against the relevance of dividend policy 
Miller and Modigliani’s Irrelevance Argument 
Other factors that influence dividend policy 
 
Working Capital Management 
 
Principles of working capital management 
Cash and marketable securities management 
Short-term financing 
 
Corporate Restructuring 
 
Mergers and acquisitions 
Leveraged buyouts (LBOs) 
Divestitures and spin-offs 
Other forms of restructuring 
 
 
Teaching Method 
 
Students are strongly recommended to participate in class discussion related to the course.  
They are required to read assignments and do assigned homework before coming to class. 
 
 
Assessment 
Important Note: Students shall be aware of the University regulations about dishonest 
practice in course work and the possible consequences as stipulated in the Regulations 
Governing University Examinations. 
Continuous Assessment: Term Project  
15% 
This team-based term-based project requires students to research on an assigned topic 
in corporate finance.  Students will report their findings in the form of class 
presentation and written report.          
 
Continuous Assessment: Two Tests 
 
35% 
Tests will use computational questions to test students’ mastery of basic skills and 
tools commonly used in solving financial problems.  Open-end and short essay 
questions may also be given to test students’ ability to articulate understanding of key 
concepts. 
 
3 
 
 
財務及保險學系 
Department of Finance and Insurance 
 
Course Syllabus / Outline (2015-2016) 
 
 
 
Examination: Cumulative Final 
 
 
50% 
Final examination tests will rely more heavily on workout problems, short essays, and 
open-end questions to gauge students’ financial problem-solving skills and their 
ability to articulate their understanding of key financial concepts. 
 
 
Required Textbook 
 
Corporate Finance by Stephen A. Ross, Randolph W. Westerfield, Jeffrey Jaffe, Joseph Lim, Ruth Tan, 
and Helen Wong, McGraw-Hill Education (Asia), latest edition. 
 
Supplementary Readings 
 
Stephen A. Ross, Randolph W. Westerfield, Jeffrey F. Jaffe and Bradford D. Jordan, Modern 
Finance Management, latest edition, McGraw-Hill. 
 
For an alternative and in-depth presentation: 
Brealey, R. A. & S. C. Myers, Principles of Corporate Finance, 7th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2003. 
 
For a review of basic concepts and techniques:  
Eugene F. Brigham and Michael C. Ehrhardt, Financial Management: Theory and Practice, 
11th ed., Thomson/South-Western 2005 
 
Journal  
 
Euromoney 
Asian Wall Street Journal 
Asian Finance 
Financial Management 
 
 
 
4 
