PERSONAL FINANCE SYLLABUS 
Name of Course:  Personal Finance 
Number of Course: FIN 369, Section 022 
Semester: Spring 2012 
Instructor: Banker Phares 
E-Mail of Instructor: banker@phareslawfirm.com  
Phone Number of Instructor: 936.234.9196 
Office:  116 North Fredonia, Nacogdoches, Texas 
Office Hours: 8:00 to 5:00 Monday-Friday (Call for appointment). Instructor is 
available after each class to discuss topics and answer questions.  
Class Meeting Time and Place:  The first class is Monday, January 23, 2012.  
The final week is May 7th. Class meeting time is 6 p.m.- 8:30 p.m. Room 477 of 
the SFA Business Building.  Classroom subject to change.  
Prerequisites for Course: None.  
 
Student Learning Outcomes: Bankruptcies and debt collections have 
dramatically increased in recent years.  In large part, this is due to inadequate 
financial planning by individuals and businesses. To prepare the student to 
deal with a constantly changing economy by having the student: 1) Learn the 
importance, and have a basic understanding of, planning techniques; 2) 
Develop and identify analytical skills, by lecture and class discussion to 
facilitate effective financial decision-making, including informed decisions 
regarding budgets, investment, insurance, retirement, and estate planning. 
Upon course completion, the student should have the ability to have a working 
knowledge of the materials covered in the course, thereby providing the student 
with the ability to make – and, if necessary access, sources – for making 
appropriate financial decisions, both personal and business.   
   
Required Text and Materials: Personal Finance, 10th Edition, by E. Thomas 
Gorman and Raymond E. Forgue, publisher: Southwest-Western Cengage 
Learning. Recommended Equipment for Course: Calculator, preferably a 
business or financial calculator.  Recommended reading for the course: Wall 
Street Journal and other financial publications; e.g. Money Magazine.   
 
Course Requirements: 
1)Exams for Course: Three, each of equal value. The Final will be one of 
the three tests and will have a value equal to a test.  There will be no quizzes or 
homework (unless needed to make up for an unexcused absence). There will be 
an advance reading assignment each week.  A legitimate excuse must be 
presented in order to make-up a missed exam.  If a student has a D or lower 
average for the first two tests, the student will be required to take a 
comprehensive final. 
2) Grading Policy:.  The tests will primarily require short specific 
answers; i.e. objective. Tests will be announced two weeks in advance.              
3) Required Attendance for Course: Each class meeting is the equivalent 
of three one hour classes. One absence from each class meeting is allowed 
without excuse.  Other absences require acceptable excuse.  If absent without 
acceptable excuse, additional course work may be assigned. 
  
Course Calendar: In the left hand margin of the information which follows, 
there is a listing of the week in which the material will be discussed in class.  
An attempt has been made to have the week in class correspond to the chapter; 
e.g. third week – third chapter. 
 Topics covered during this course include: 
 
Financial Planning   
 
Week 1.    Understanding Personal Finance  
 
The Building Blocks to Achieving Personal Financial Success 
Spend Less So You Can Save and Invest More  
Financial Success and Happiness    
Using the Building Blocks 
 
The Economy Affects Your Personal Financial Success  
Where Are We in the Business Cycle?    
What Is the Future Direction of the Economy?    
What Is the Future Direction of Inflation, Prices, and Interest Rates? 
 
Think Like an Economist When Making Financial Decisions  
Opportunity Costs in Decision Making    
Marginal Utility and Costs in Decision Making   
Marginal income Tax Rate in Decision Making    
 
The Time Value of Money: Setting Dollar Values on Financial Goals   
Calculating Future Values    
Calculating Present Values   
 
Make Smart Money Decisions at Work  
Flexible Benefit Plans Offer Tax-Free Money   
Making Decisions About Employer-Sponsored Health Care Plans   
Making Decisions About Employer's Flexible Spending Accounts   
Making Decisions About Participating in Employer Insurance Plans 
Making Decisions About Participating in Your Employer's Retirement Plan 
 
Where to Seek Expert Financial Advice 
How Financial Planners Are Compensated  
 
Week 2.    Career Planning  
 
Key Steps in Successful Career Planning 
Create Your Career Goal and Plan    
Clarify Your Interests   
Review Your Abilities, Experiences, and Education Identify Your Values  
Consider Costs, Benefits, and Lifestyle Trade-offs Align Yourself with  
     
Tomorrow's Employment Trends    
Take Advantage of Networking    
Target Preferred Employers    
Be Willing to Change Career Goals and Plans  
 
Know Your Preferred Work-Style Personality  
 
Financial and Legal Aspects of Employment 
Compare Salary and Living Costs in Different Cities    
Place Values on Employee Benefits    
Know Your Legal Employment Rights  
 
Effective Employment Search Strategies 
Assemble a Resume    
Identify Job Opportunities   
Write an Effective Cover Letter    
Obtain Strong Reference Letters     
Apply  
Interview for Success    
Negotiate and Accept the Job  
 
Week 3    Financial Statements, Tools, and Budgets  
 
Financial Values, Goals, and Strategies  
Values Define Your Financial Success   
Financial Goals Follow from Your Values    
Financial Strategies Guide Your Financial Success  
 
Financial Statements Measure Your Financial Health and Progress  
The Balance Sheet is a Snapshot of Your Financial Status Right Now   
Strategies to Increase Your Net Worth   
The Cash-Flow Statement Tracks Where Your Money Came From and Went  
 
Financial Ratios Assess Your Financial Strength and Progress    
Basic Liquidity Ratio: Can I Pay for Emergencies?    
Asset-to-Debt Ratio; Do I Have Enough Assets Compared with Liabilities?    
Debt Service-to-income Ratio: Can I Meet My Total Debt Obligations?    
Debt Payments-to-Disposable income Ratio: Can I Pay My Debts? 
Investment Assets-to-Total Assets Ratio: Do I Need to Invest More?    
Other Ways to Assess Financial Progress  
 
Financial Record Keeping Saves Time and Makes You Money  
 
Reaching Your Goals Through Budgeting: Your Spending/Savings Action Plan  
Action Before: Set Financial Goals   
Action Before: Make and Reconcile Budget Estimates    
Action Before: Plan Cash Flows    
Action During Budgeting Period: Control Spending   
Action After Evaluate Budgeting Progress   
Financial Software Tools to Manage Your Money 
 
PART 2 
Money Management     
 
Week 4.  Managing Income Taxes   
 
Progressive Income Taxes and the Marginal Tax Rate   
The Progressive Nature of the Federal Income Tax     
The Marginal Tax Rate Is Applied to the Last Dollar Earned    
The Marginal Tax Rate Affects Your Financial Decisions    
Your Effective Marginal Tax Rate Is Probably 43 Percent    
Your Average Tax Rate Is Lower 
 
Eight Steps in Calculating Your Income Taxes    
1. 
Determine Your Total Income    
2. 
Determine and Report Your Gross Income After Subtracting 
Exclusions  
3. 
Subtract Adjustments to Income   
4. 
Subtract Either the IRS's Standard Deduction for Your Tax status or 
Your Itemized  
5. 
    Deductions   
6. 
Subtract the Value of Your Personal Exemptions    
7. 
Determine Your Preliminary Tax Liability   
8. 
Subtract Tax Credits for Which You Qualify   
9. 
Calculate the Balance Due the IRS or the Amount of Your Refund    
 
Avoid Taxes Through Proper Planning    
Practice Legal Tax Avoidance, Not Tax Evasion    
A Dollar Saved from Taxes Is Really Two Dollars - or More   
Strategy: Reduce Taxable Income via Your Employer   
Strategy: Make Tax-Sheltered Investments   
Strategy: Postpone Income   
Strategy: Shift Income to a Child    
Strategy: Bunch Deductions    
Strategy: Take All of Your Legal Tax Deductions   
Strategy: Buy and Manage a Real Estate Investment   
 
Week 5.  Managing Checking and Savings Accounts    
 
What Is Monetary Asset Management?     
The Three Tools of Monetary Asset Management    
Who Provides Monetary Asset Management Services?  
 
Tool #1—Interest-Earning Checking Accounts    
Types of Checking Accounts    
Checking Account Minimum-Balance Requirements   
 
Tool #2—Savings Accounts    
Statement Savings Accounts   
Certificates of Deposit   
How to Save    
Savings Account Interest   
 
Tool #3—Money Market Accounts    
Super NOW Accounts    
Money Market Deposit Accounts    
Money Market Mutual Funds    
Asset Management Accounts   
 
Electronic Money Management   
Electronic Money Management Can Be Easy But Is Not Always Free   
Using Electronic Banking Safely   
 
The Psychology of Money Management  
Managing Money and Making Financial Decisions Are Different    
People Ascribe Strong Emotions to Money    
How to Talk About Financial Matters 
Complications Brought by Remarriage  
 
Week 6.    Building and Maintaining Good Credit   
 
Reasons For and Against Using Credit   
Good Uses of Credit  
The Downside of Credit 
 
You Should Set Your Own Debt Limit   
Debt Payments-to-Disposable Income Method     
Ratio of Debt-to-Equity Method     
Continuous-Debt Method     
Dual-Earner Households Should Consider a Lower Debt Limit   
 
Obtaining Credit and Building a Good Credit Reputation  
The Credit Approval Process    
Your Credit Reputation    
 
Sources of Consumer Loans   
Depository Institutions Loan Money to Their Banking Customers   
Sales Finance Companies Loan Money to Buy Consumer Products    
Consumer Finance Companies Make Small Cash Loans  
Stockbrokers Loan Money to Their Clients   
Insurance Companies Loan Money to Their Policyholders  
Choose Your Source of Credit Wisely   
 
Dealing with Overindebtedness   
Ten Signs of Overindebtedness   
Federal Law Regulates Debt Collection Practices 
Steps to Take to Get Out from Under Excessive Debt  
Bankruptcy as a Last Resort  
 
Week 7.    Credit Cards and Consumer Loans  
 
Types of Consumer Credit   
 
Credit Card Accounts   
Types of Credit Card Accounts   
Common (But Not Always Beneficial) Aspects of Credit Card Accounts  
 
Managing Credit Cards Wisely    
Credit Statements    
Computation of Finance Charges    
How Credit Card Average Daily Balances Are Calculated   
Correcting Errors on Your Credit Card Statement   
 
Understanding Consumer Installment Loans   
Installment Loans Can Be Unsecured or Secured    
Purchase Loan Installment Contracts   
 
Calculating Interest on Consumer Loans   
Calculating an Installment Loan Payment   
Finance Charge and APR Calculations for Installment Loans  
 
Week 8.    Vehicle and Other Major Purchases   
 
Do Your Homework    
What Do You Really Want?  
Become an Expert  
Can I Afford It?    
 
Use Comparison Shopping to Find the Best Buy   
Compare Prices Using the "Rule of Three"    
Compare Financing Options    
Consider Leasing Instead of Buying   
Compare Warranties    
Extended Warranties Are Overpriced   
 
Negotiate Effectively and Decide at Home   
Successful Negotiators Are Armed with Information 
Negotiating a Car Deal: An Illustration   
Make the Decision 
Finalizing a Car Deal  
 
Evaluate Your Decision 
 
Week 9.    Obtaining Affordable Housing  
 
Should You Rent or Buy Your Home?  
Rented Housing  
Owned Housing  
Who Pays More—Renters or Owners?   
 
What Does It Cost to Buy a Home?  
Most Up-Front Costs Are Due at the Closing 
Monthly Costs Include Both Principal and Interest 
Some Fees Are Paid Both Up-Front and Monthly   
The Bottom Line?  
 
The Steps of Home Buying  
Get Your Finances in Order  
Prequalify for a Mortgage   
Search for a Home Online and in Person   
Agree to Terms with the Seller   
Apply for a Mortgage Loan    
Prepare for the Closing    
Sign Your Name on Closing Day    
 
Financing a Home  
The Mathematics of Mortgage Loans    
Factors Affecting the Monthly Payment on a Mortgage   
The Conventional Mortgage Loan   
The Adjustrable Rate Mortgage Loan 
Alternative Mortgage Loans   
 
Selling a Home   
Should You List with a Broker or Sell a Home Yourself?  
Selling Carries Its Own Costs   
Be Wary of Seller Financing   
 
PART THREE 
Income and Asset Protection  
 
Week 10.  Managing Property and Liability Risk   
 
Risk and Risk Management   
People Often Misunderstand the Concept of Risk   
The Risk-Management Process   
 
Understanding How Insurance Works   
Hazards Make Losses More Likely to Occur    
Only Certain Losses Are Insurable    
The Pr inciple of Indemnrty Limits Insurance Payouts    
Factors That Reduce the Cost of Insurance    
The Essence of Insurance    
Who Sells Insurance?    
 
Homeowner's Insurance    
Coverages    
Types of Homeowner's Insurance Policies    
Buying Homeowner's Insurance    
 
Automobile Insurance    
Losses Covered    
Buying Automobile Insurance    
 
Protection for Other Property and Liability Loss Exposures    
 
Comprehensive Personal Liability Insurance    
Flood and Earthquake Insurance  
Professional Liability Insurance    
Umbrella Liability Insurance   
Floater Policies   
 
How to Collect on Your Property and Liability Losses   
Contact Your Insurance Agent   
Document Your Loss   
File Your Claim    
Sign a Release    
 
Week 11.  Managing Health Expenses   
 
Addressing the Financial Burdens of Illness or Injury   
1. Covering Your Direct Health Care Costs    
2.Covering Your Rehabilitative and Custodial Care Costs   
3.Covering Your Lost Income    
 
Sources of Protection from Direct Health Care Costs   
Health Maintenance Organizations    
Traditional Health Insurance   
Consumer-Driven Health Care    
 
Making Sense of Your Health Plan Benefits   
What Types of Care Are Covered?    
Who Is Covered?    
When Does Coverage Begin and End?    
How Much Must You Pay Out of Your Own Pocket?    
 
Protecting Your Income During Disability    
Level of Need    
Important Disability Income Insurance Policy Provisions     
 
Planning for Long-Term Care    
 
Week. 12 Life Insurance Planning  
 
How Much Additional Life Insurance Do You Need?   
What Needs Must Be Met?    
How Can You Meet the Need?    
What Dollar Amount of Life Insurance Do You Need?    
 
There Are Only Two Basic Types of Life Insurance    
Term Life Insurance    
Some Forms of Cash-Value Life Insurance Earn a Fixed Return  
Some forms of Cash-Value Life Insurance Earn a Variable Return 
 
Understanding Your Life Insurance Policy    
Policy Terms and Provisions Unique to Life Insurance  
Settlement Options Allow the Beneficiary to Decide How to Receive the Death 
Benefit    
Policy Features Unique to Cash-Value Life Insurance  
 
Step-by-Step Strategies for Buying Life Insurance   
First Ask Whether or Not, and for How Much, Your Life Should Be Insured  
Properly Integrate Your Life Insurance into Your Overall Financial Planning  
Where and How to Buy Your Life Insurance    
 
Part Four 
Investments   
 
Week 13  Investment Fundamentals    
 
Starting Your Investment Program    
Investing Is More Than Saving     
Are You Ready to Invest?     
Decide Why You Want to Invest    
Where Can You Get the Money to Invest?    
What Investment Returns Are Possible?    
 
Discover Your investment Philosophy    
How to Handle Investment Risk   
Ultraconservative Investors Are Really Just Savers   
What Is Your Investment Philosophy?   
Should You Take an Active or Passive Investing Approach?   
So What Should You Do?     
 
Identify the Kinds of Investments You Want to Make   
Do You Want to Lend or Own?    
Making Short-, Intermediate-, and Long-Term Investments   
Choose Investments for Their Components of Total Return 
 
Risks and Other Factors Affect the Investor's Return    
Random Risk Is Reduced by Diversification, Eventually   
Market Risk and the Economic Meltdown    
Other Types of Investment Risks   
Transaction Costs Reduce Returns    
Leverage May Increase Returns    
 
Establishing Your Long-Term Investment Strategy   
Long-Term Investors Understand Market Timing     
Strategy 1: Buy and Hold Anticipates Long-Term Economic Growth   
Strategy 2: Dollar-Cost Averaging Buys at "Below-Average" Costs    
Strategy 3: Portfolio Diversification Reduces Portfolio Volatility     
Strategy 4: Asset Allocation Keeps You in the Right nvestment Categories for  
Your Time Horizon   
Strategy 5: Modern Portfolio Theory Evolves from Asset Allocation    
 
Creating Your Own Investment Plan    
 
Investing in Stocks and Bonds    
 
The Role of Stocks and Bonds in Investments    
Common Stock    
Preferred Stock   
Bonds   
An Illustration of Stocks and Bonds: Running Paws Cat Food Company 
 
The Major Characteristics of Common Stocks    
Price/Earnings Ratio and Beta    
Cyclical and Countercyclical Stocks    
Income Stocks    
Growth Stocks    
Value Stocks    
Speculative Stocks    
Tech Stocks    
Blue-Chip Stocks    
Large-Cap, Small-Cap, and Midcap Stocks    
 
How to Evaluate Stock Values    
Use Fundamental Analysis to Evaluate Stocks  
Measuring Expected Stock Returns    
 
Numerical Measures to Evaluate Stock Prices  
 
Calculating a Stock's Potential Rate of Return    
Use Beta to Estimate the Risk of the Investment   
Estimate the Market Risk 
Calculate Your Required Rate of Return   
Calculate the Stock's Potential Rate of Return  
Compare the Required Rate of Return with the Potential Rate of Return on the  
Investment    
 
Use the Internet to Evaluate and Select Stocks   
Begin by Setting Criteria for Your Stock Investments   
Basic Investment Information   
Set Up Your Portfolio Online   
Stock Screening   
Get a Sense of the History of a Stock 
Go to the Source for Company Information 
Security Analysts' Research Reports 
Stock Research Firms   
 
Economic Data    
Stock Market Data  
Securities Exchanges (Stock Markets) 
Electronic Communications Network and OTC Marketplace   
Looking Up a Stock Price 
Using Portfolio Tracking to Monitor Your Investments   
 
Buying and Selling Stocks   
Discount Online, and Full-Service Brokers   
Broker Commissions and Fees   
How to Order Stock Transactions 
Margin Buying and Selling Short Are Risky Trading Techniques   
 
Investing in Bonds   
Corporate, U.S. Government and Municipal Bonds    
Unique Characteristics of Bond Investing    
Evaluating Bond Prices and Returns    
Pricing a Bond in Today's Market   
 
Week 14.  Investing Through Mutual Funds   
 
Why Invest in Mutual Funds?    
Net Asset Value    
Dividend Income and Capital Gains    
Advantages of investing Through Mutual Funds    
Unique Mutual Fund Services    
 
Fund Objectives, Types, and Characteristics   
Income Objective  
Growth Objective  
Growth and Income Objective 
 
Mutual Fund Investing Fees and Charges   
Load and No-Load Funds    
Mutual Fund Share Classes    
Disclosure of Fees in Standardized Expense Table    
What's Best: Load or No Load? Low Fee or High Fee? 
 
Selecting Funds in Which to Invest   
Review Your Investment Philosophy and Investment Goals    
Eliminate Funds Inappropriate for Your Investment Goals  
Load or No-Load Funds?    
Investment Advice Needed?   
Screen and Compare Funds That Meet Your Investment Criteria   
Monitor Your Mutual Fund Portfolio   
 
Real Estate and High-Risk Investments  
 
Making Money Investing in Real Estate   
Current Income and Capital Gains    
Current Income Results from Positive Cash Flow    
Price Appreciation Leads to Capital Gains    
Leverage Can Increase an Investor's Return    
Beneficial Tax Treatments   
 
Pricing and Financing Real Estate Investments  
Pay the Right Price    
Financing a Real Estate Investment   
 
Disadvantages of Real Estate Investing  
 
Investing in Collectibles, Precious Metals, and Gems    
Collectibles    
Gold and Other Metals    
Precious Stones and Gems    
 
Investing in Options and Futures Contracts   
Options Allow You to Buy or Sell an Asset at a Predetermined Price    
Commodities Futures Contracts   
 
Please Note:  There is an addendum required by the University attached to 
this Syllabus. 
 
 
