1 
 
 
 
FINANCE 601, Introduction to Finance 
Course Outline, Fall 2021 
 
Master of Finance 
DeGroote School of Business 
McMaster University 
 
Course Objective 
 
This course, being an introduction to modern business finance at the graduate level, examines 
various fundamental financial concepts, in order to prepare students for the specialized courses that 
the Master of Finance program offers.  It also introduces students to various analytical and 
quantitative skills as required for such courses. 
 
Instructor, Teaching Assistant, and Contact Information 
 
Instructor: Clarence C.Y. Kwan, Professor of Finance; email: kwanc@mcmaster.ca . 
 
Teaching Assistant: Laite Guo, Finance Ph.D. Student; email: guol12@mcmaster.ca . 
 
Office Hours: TBA (to be announced in class and posted on AVENUE TO LEARN when 
confirmed). 
 
Important Notice:  For email communications with the instructor or the teaching assistant, please 
always use McMaster’s regular email system.  For timely communications, it is very important that 
McMaster email accounts (***@mcmaster.ca) be used, with “FINANCE 601” being the subject 
heading.  Otherwise, there will be either delays in response or no response at all.  
 
Course Elements 
 
Credit Value: 
3 
Leadership: 
No 
IT Skills: 
No 
Global View: 
Yes 
A2L: 
Yes 
Ethics: 
Yes 
Numeracy: 
Yes 
Written Skills: 
Yes 
Participation: 
Yes 
Innovation: 
Yes 
Group Work: 
Yes 
Oral Skills: 
Yes 
Evidence-Based: 
Yes 
Experiential: 
No 
Final Exam: 
Yes 
Guest Speaker: 
No 
 
Course Description 
 
The course covers a broad range of topics in modern finance, with analytical details and conceptual 
underpinnings emphasized in some topics.  After some preliminary materials, the course considers 
time value concepts and applies them directly to practical loan problems and to valuation from 
investors’ perspectives, including bond and stock valuation.  The course also considers risk-return 
trade-off in portfolio investments, capital market theory, and market efficiency issues. 
2 
 
Turning to corporate finance, the course considers corporate investment decisions (capital 
budgeting) and long-term sources of funds for financing the investments.  Pertaining to long-term 
financing decisions, the major topics include the cost of capital, capital structure, and dividend 
policy.  Financial instruments with options, including call and put options, rights, warrants, and 
convertible securities, are considered as well. 
 
The course then considers working capital management, short-term and intermediate-term 
financing, and leasing decisions.  The final topics covered include merger and corporate structuring. 
 
Achieving the Course Objective 
 
As many financial concepts are analytical, students are expected to be already familiar with various 
mathematical topics, such as finite and infinite series, matrix algebra, differential and integral 
calculus, and methods of mathematical proofs.  Further, students are expected to be familiar with 
fundamental statistical concepts such as discrete and continuous probability distributions, sampling, 
and estimation.  To achieve the course objective also requires a considerable amount of out-of-class 
work by each student.  In addition to keeping up with the reading materials, problem solving 
throughout the course is highly recommended. 
 
Although the solutions to practice problems are available, students are expected to solve the 
problems independently before reading the solutions.  Experience has shown that independent work 
significantly enhances problem-solving and related quantitative skills.  This is also the most 
effective way to prepare for examinations. 
 
Main Courseware, Supplementary Courseware, and Major Reference Book 
 
Main Courseware:  Clarence C.Y. Kwan, FINANCE 601, Introduction to Finance:  Lecture Notes, 
Supplementary Materials, Illustrative Examples, and Exercises, Fall 2021 (hereafter, Lecture 
Notes). 
 
Supplementary Courseware:  Clarence C.Y. Kwan, Preparatory Mathematics and Selected Topics 
in Statistics for Students in Graduate Finance Programs, Fall 2021 (hereafter, Math/Stats Notes). 
 
Major Reference Book:  Jonathan Berk, Peter DeMarzo, and David Stangeland, Corporate Finance, 
Fifth Canadian Edition, 2022, Pearson Canada (hereafter, BDS). 
 
Both the main courseware and the supplementary courseware are distributed to registered students 
online via AVENUE.  Most of the materials in the supplementary courseware are intended for self-
study to strengthen the analytical skills of students.  However, some lectures are directly based on 
the materials there.  
 
Evaluation Scheme and Grading Scale 
 
Performance in FINANCE 601 is based on four components, including three Math/Stats 
examinations during MFIN Transition (15% in total), a mid-term examination (25%), a major 
assignment (25%), and a cumulative final examination (35%).  Any changes to the evaluation 
scheme will be announced in class and posted on AVENUE.  The two examinations are primarily 
on materials in the Lecture Notes and BDS, as well as any supplementary materials that are 
distributed during the Term.  However, some materials from the Math/Stats Notes may also be 
3 
 
included.  The date, time, duration, and coverage of the examinations, once confirmed, will be 
announced in class and posted on AVENUE. 
 
This being a graduate course, B- is the lowest passing grade.  The conversion from percentage 
grades to letter grades is as follows: 90-100%, A+; 85-89%, A; 80-84%, A-; 75-79%, B+; 70-74%, 
B; 60-69%, B-; 0-59%, F.  The conversion will be adjusted if there is a cluster of percentage grades 
around a breakpoint; that is, around 90%, 85%, 80%, 75%, 70%, or 60%.  However, students who 
have achieved percentage grades no lower than any breakpoint will be unaffected by the adjustment. 
 
Important Notice: 
 
1. The mid-term examination will be written outside regular class times.  There may be extra 
classes to attend during the Term, conditional on the feasibility for scheduling them.  Once 
confirmed, the details will be announced in class and on AVENUE. 
 
2. Students are expected to adhere strictly to the standards of academic ethics of the University. 
 
3. The part of the mid-term examination paper containing multiple-choice questions will not be 
released to students after grading; neither will the entire final examination paper. 
 
4. Some bonus marks can be earned by students for independently reporting to the instructor 
typographical errors in various course materials throughout the Term.  Such bonus marks 
may help participating students achieve better letter grades, in situations where the 
computed weighted averages of percentage grades are marginally below the corresponding 
breakpoints for grade conversion. 
 
The Course Outline 
 
 
1. Preliminaries 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 1, 2, and 3. 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 1. 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapters 1 and 2. 
 
 
2. Valuation of Investments 
 
 
a. The Time Value of Money 
 
 
BDS, Chapter 4. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 2; exercises in Section A.1 of Appendix A (hereafter, A.1), #1-4; 
exercises in Section A.2, of Appendix A (hereafter, A.2.1, A.2.2, …, A.2.7 for the 
subsections there), A.2.1, #1-6, A.2.2, #1, #4, A.2.3, #1, #4, and A.2.4, #1, #4. 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapters 3, 4, and 7, with special attention to Chapter 7, Section 7.7, 
Appendix: Compound Interests. 
 
Y. Feng and C.C.Y. Kwan, “Interest Rate Conversion,” Spreadsheets in Education, 8, no. 1, 
(2015), Article 3. 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
b. Bond Valuation and Interest Rate Determination 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 5 and 6. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 3; exercises in A.1, #5-11; exercises in A.2.1, #7-16, A.2.2, 
#2-3, A.2.3, #2-3, and A.2.4, #2-3. 
 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapters 3 and 4. 
 
 
Y. Feng and C.C.Y. Kwan, “Time-Value Concepts, Bond Valuation, and Corresponding 
Spreadsheet Functions,” Spreadsheets in Education, 5, no. 1, (2011), Article 4. 
 
 
Y. Feng and C.C.Y. Kwan, “Bond Duration: A Pedagogic Illustration,” Spreadsheets in 
Education, 5, no. 3, (2012), Article 1. 
 
 
c. Stock Valuation 
 
 
BDS, Chapter 7. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 4; exercise in A.1, #12; exercises in A.2.1, #17, A.2.2, #4, 
 
A.2.3, #4, and A.2.4. #4. 
 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapter 3. 
 
 
d. Risk, Return, and Portfolio Theory 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 10 and 11. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 5; exercises in A.1, #14-15, #18; exercises in A.2.1, #18-21, 
A.2.5, #3, and A.2.6, #3, and A.2.7, #3-4. 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapters 5, 6, 8, and 14, with special attention to Chapter 8, Section 8.5, 
Optimization. 
 
 
e. Capital Market Theory 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 11 and 12. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 6; exercises in A.1, #13, 16-26; exercises in A.2.1, #22-27, A.2.5, 
#4, A.2.6, #4, and A.2.7, #4. 
 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapters 7, 8, and 9. 
 
 
C.C.Y. Kwan, “The Arbitrage Pricing Model: A Pedagogic Derivation and a Spreadsheet-
Based Illustration,” Spreadsheets in Education, 9, no. 1, (2016), Article 4. 
 
 
f. Market Efficiency 
 
 
BDS, Chapter 13. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 7. 
 
 
3. Capital Budgeting 
 
BDS, Chapters 8, 9, and 21. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 8; exercises in A.1, #27-31; exercises in A.2.1, #28-30, A.2.5, #2, 
A.2.5, #2, and A.2.7, #2. 
 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapter 3. 
 
5 
 
4. Long-term Sources of Funds 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 23 and 24. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 9; exercises in A.1, #32-37; exercises in A.2.1, #31-33, A.2.5, #1, 
A.2.6, #1, and A.2.7, #1. 
 
5. Long-term Financing Decisions 
 
 
a. The Cost of Capital 
 
 
BDS, Chapter 12. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 10; exercise in A.1, #34; exercise in A.2.5, #1, A.2.6, #1, and A.2.7, 
#2. 
 
 
b. Capital Structure 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 17 and 18. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 11; exercises in A.1, #39-45; exercise in A.2.1, #35. 
 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapter 3. 
 
 
c. Dividend Policy 
 
 
BDS, Chapter 20. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 12; exercises in A.1, #46-49; exercises in A.2.1, #36-37. 
 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapter 3. 
 
 
6. Options, Rights, Warrants, and Convertibles 
 
a. Call and Put Options 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 14 and 15. 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 13; exercises in A.1, #50-52. 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapters 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, and 15, with special attention to Chapter, 
13, Section 13.5, The Binomial Option Pricing Model. 
 
 
Y. Feng and C.C.Y. Kwan, “Connecting Binomial and Black-Scholes Option Pricing 
Models: A Spreadsheet-Based Illustration,” Spreadsheets in Education, 5, no. 3, (2012), 
Article 2. 
 
b. Rights, Warrants, and Convertibles 
 
 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 14; exercises in A.1, #53-56.  
 
7. Short-term Financing 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 26 and 27. 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 15; exercises in A.1, #57-59.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
8. Leasing 
 
 
BDS, Chapter 25. 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 16; exercises in A.1, #60-63. 
Math/Stats Notes, Chapter 3. 
 
 
9. Merger and Corporate Restructuring 
 
 
BDS, Chapters 28 and 29. 
Lecture Notes, Chapter 17; exercises in A.1, #64-66. 
 
Other Useful General Information for Student (The materials below are duplicated 
verbatim from a recent template of the School’s MFIN course outlines.) 
 
COMMUNICATION AND FEEDBACK 
 
Students who wish to correspond with instructors or TAs directly via email must send 
messages that originate from their official McMaster University email account. This 
protects the confidentiality and sensitivity of information as well as confirms the identity of 
the student. Emails regarding course issues should NOT be sent to the Area 
Administrative Assistants.  All students must receive feedback regarding their progress 
prior to the final date by which a student may cancel the course without failure by default.  
•  For Level 1 and Level 2 courses, this feedback must equal a minimum of 20% of the final grade.  
•  For Level 3 courses and above, this feedback must equal a minimum of 10% of the final grade.  
 
Instructors may solicit feedback via an informal course review with students by Week #4 to 
allow time for modifications in curriculum delivery.   
 
REQUESTING RELIEF FOR MISSED ACADEMIC WORK 
 
In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, students should review and follow 
the Missed Term Work regulations that our outlined on the Master of Finance website; 
  
https://mfin.degroote.mcmaster.ca/current-students/missed-term-work/ 
 
 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY 
 
You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the 
learning process. Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and 
academic integrity. It is your responsibility to understand what constitutes 
academic dishonesty. 
7 
 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious 
consequences, e.g. the grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on 
the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or 
suspension or expulsion from the university.  
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the 
Academic Integrity Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-
procedures- guidelines/ 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 
 
• plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit 
has been obtained. 
• improper collaboration in group work. 
• copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 
 
AUTHENTICITY/PLAGIARISM DETECTION 
 
Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and 
ownership of student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be 
expected to submit their work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online 
learning platform (e.g. A2L, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by 
Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for academic dishonesty.  
 
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection 
software must inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be 
assigned to a student who does not submit work to the plagiarism detection software.  
 
All submitted work is subject to normal verification that standards of academic 
integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.). For more details 
about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 
COURSES WITH AN ON-LINE ELEMENT 
 
Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn (A2L), LearnLink, 
web pages, capa, Moodle, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such 
as first and last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program 
affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the same course.  
 
The available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation in a course 
that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have any 
questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the course instructor. 
8 
 
 
ONLINE PROCTORING 
 
Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software 
may require students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and 
record their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other 
applications/software during tests or exams. This software may be required to be installed 
before the test/exam begins. 
 
CONDUCT EXPECTATIONS 
 
As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to 
demonstrate, respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and 
working communities. These expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & 
Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students share the responsibility of maintaining a positive 
environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community 
members, whether in person or online. 
 
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in 
effect in virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely 
affect, disrupt, or interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student 
disruptions or behaviours that interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. 
use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will 
be investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ 
access to these platforms. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
 
Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student 
Accessibility Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make 
arrangements with a Program Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster 
University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities policy. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION FOR RELIGIOUS, INDIGENOUS OR SPIRITUAL 
OBSERVANCES (RISO) 
 
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual 
observances should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should 
submit their request to their Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the 
beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for accommodation or to the Registrar's 
9 
 
Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as soon as 
possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
 
COPYRIGHT AND RECORDING 
Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course 
material provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act 
and copyright law protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, 
including lectures by University instructors.  
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a 
course. Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized 
distribution, or by a student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware 
that their voice and/or image may be recorded by others during the class. Please speak 
with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 
EXTREME CIRCUMSTANCES 
 
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses 
in extreme circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be 
communicated through regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster 
Daily News, A2L and/or McMaster email. 
 
RESEARCH USING HUMAN SUBJECTS 
 
All researchers conducting research that involves human participants, their records or their 
biological material are required to receive approval from one of McMaster’s Research 
Ethics Boards before (a) they can recruit participants and (b) collect or access their data. 
Failure to comply with relevant policies is a research misconduct matter. Contact these 
boards for further information about your requirements and the application process.  
McMaster Research Ethics Board (General board): https://reo.mcmaster.ca/  
Hamilton Integrated Research Ethics Board (Medical board): http://www.hireb.ca/ 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF COURSE POLICIES 
 
Your enrolment in Finance XXXX will be considered to be an implicit acknowledgement of 
the course policies outlined above, or of any other that may be announced during lecture 
and/or on A2L. It is your responsibility to read this course outline, to familiarize 
yourself with the course policies and to act accordingly.  
 
Lack of awareness of the course policies cannot be invoked at any point during this 
course for failure to meet them. It is your responsibility to ask for clarification on any 
policies that you do not understand. 
