Personal Finance Syllabus 
2015 
Pierce High School 
Instructor:  Greg Warneke 
gwarneke@esu8.org 
 
Personal Finance Course Rationale/Overview 
Financial literacy is essential in meeting the financial challenge of the 21st Century.  The 
competencies, which form the basis for this semester course, enable students to analyze 
their personal financial decisions, evaluate the costs and benefits of their decisions, 
recognize their rights and responsibilities as consumers, and apply the knowledge learned 
in school to financial situations encountered later in life.   
 
Personal Finance Course Description 
Understanding and managing personal finances are key to one’s future financial success. 
This one-semester course is based on the National Business Education standards for 
Personal Finance, Nebraska’s Career Education knowledge and skill statements, Nebraska 
Career Ready Standards, Nebraska Essential Learnings, National Standards for Economic 
Education and the National Standards in Personal Finance Education created by the 
Jump$Start Coalition® for Personal Financial Literacy.   
 
The course presents essential knowledge and skills to make informed decisions about real 
world financial issues. Students will learn how choices influence occupational options and 
future earning potential. Students will also learn to apply decision-making skills to evaluate 
career choices and set personal goals. The course content is designed to help the learner 
make wise spending, saving, and credit decisions and to make effective use of income to 
achieve personal financial success. 
 
The course covers the basic principles needed for effective personal finance management, 
including the practical applications of money management, budgeting, taxes, credit, 
insurance, housing, investments, and retirement planning. 
 
Personal Finance Course Objectives 
At the completion of the course, students will be able to:   
 
 Recognize opportunities inherent with good personal financial planning. 
 Examine the risks associated with poor personal financial planning. 
 Analyze basic economic information. 
 Demonstrate the use of economic information to make informed personal financial 
decisions. 
 Demonstrate a simple personal federal income tax form. 
 Compute interests charges based on various types of borrowing situations. 
 Identify how personal risk is managed with the purchase of various types of insurance. 
 Examine the fundamentals of investing tools representing both ownership and loaner 
ship type of investments. 
 
Personal Finance Content Standards 
 Students will develop and evaluate a plan to manage their money to achieve personal 
goals. 
1.1 Identify various forms of income and analyze factors that affect income as part of 
the career decision-making process. 
1.2 Describe the impact of taxes on personal financial planning. 
1.3 Develop and evaluate a personal budget. 
 
 Students will evaluate financial institutions and the services provided. 
2.1  Identify various types of financial institutions. 
2.2  List the basic services provided by financial institutions. 
 
 Students will evaluate savings and investment strategies to achieve financial goals. 
3.1  Explain the importance of saving to ensure financial security. 
3.2  Explain the importance of investing to ensure financial security. 
 
 Students will understand strategies used to establish, build, maintain, monitor, and 
control credit. 
4.1  Analyze factors that affect the choice of credit, the cost of credit, and the legal 
aspects of using credit. 
4.2  Identify strategies of establishing and maintaining a good credit rating for 
effective credit management. 
 
 Students will apply decision-making skills and models to maximize consumer satisfaction 
when buying goods and services. 
5.1  Identify reliable sources of consumer information. 
5.2  Apply consumer skills when making purchase decisions. 
 
 Students will understand perils and risks in life and how to protect against the 
consequences of risk. 
6.1  Identify common types of risks and basic risk management strategies. 
6.2  Evaluate insurance as a risk management strategy. 
  
Student Learning Outcomes 
At the completion of this course, the students will be able to: 
1. Identify the major types of investment alternatives. 
2. Describe how safety, risk, income, growth, and liquidity affect your investment 
decisions. 
Student Learning Outcomes (continued): 
3. Compete in a virtual stock market game.  Students will also research and evaluate 
stocks and complete several assignments based o this activity.  
4. Figure the future value of money using future value charts. 
5. Develop an understanding of personal and financial opportunity costs. 
6. Track personal investments in a portfolio including a balance sheet, cash flow 
statement, and personal budget. 
7. Understand the role of taxes in our economy. 
8. Understand terminology associated with personal income tax forms. 
9. Identify methods of sheltering income from taxes 
10. Develop a Personal Financial Statements portfolio to assist in understanding sound 
money management practices.    
11. Study the disadvantages and advantages of credit. 
12. Identify major services provided by financial institution. 
13. List the characteristics of various savings tools. 
14. Identify two types of credit in our economy. 
15. Calculate interest charges on a loan using add-on, declining balance, average daily 
balance, and simple interest methods. 
16. Evaluate the alternatives in consumer purchasing decisions. 
17. Implement strategies for effective purchasing. 
18. Identify steps to take to resolve consumer problems. 
19. Evaluate the legal alternatives available to consumers. 
20. Assess the financial implications of consumer purchasing decisions. 
21. Identify the four methods of managing risk I our lives. 
22. Understand the principles of insuring used by insurance companies. 
23. Understand the terminology and coverage’s related to auto, life, health homeowners, 
and renters insurance.  
 
Personal Finance Course Topics and Timeline: 
Weeks 1-3: 
 
Unit 1 Career Decisions 
 
 
 
Chapters 1-5  
Weeks 4-6: 
 
Unit 2 Money Management  
 
 
Chapters 6-9 
Weeks 7-9: 
 
Unit 3 Financial Security 
 
 
 
Chapters 10-15 
Week 10-11:  
Unit 4 Credit Management  
 
 
Chapters 16-19 
Weeks 12-13:  
Unit 5 Resource Management 
 
 
Chapters 20-24 
Weeks 14-16:  
Unit 6 Risk Management 
 
 
 
Chapters 25-27 
Weeks 17-18:  
Unit 7 Consumer Rights and Responsibilities 
Chapter 28-30 
 
Personal Finance Course Projects and Activities: 
 Write a paper on the expected career of the future. 
 Shop and evaluate the different types of credit cards. 
 Evaluate the different types of checking accounts available at several banks. 
 Track the Dow Jones Average and a stock of their choice for three months. 
Textbook(s) and Resources: 
Managing Your Personal Finances, South-Western Cengage Learning, 6th edition 2010.   
Joan S. Ryan author. 
  
Personal Financial Literacy, Pearson Education, Inc./Prentice-Hall Publishing, 2nd edition, 
2014 ©.   Jeff Madura, Mike Casey, Sherry J. Roberts, authors. 
 
Dave Ramsey Videos and Materials 
 
Visa © Finance Challenge ONLINE  
http://www.helpmewithmymoney.com/games/games.html 
 
Required Materials: 
 
Textbook 
 
Workbook 
 
Calculator 
 
Classroom Behavior/Course Expectations   
 
Come to class prepared each day. 
 
Attend and participate 
 
Listen without interrupting. 
 
Share new knowledge. 
 
Respect self, others, and property. 
 
Academic Dishonesty Policy 
Cheating will not be tolerated.  Any cheating will result in a zero grade for the assignment. 
 
Course Grading Scale 
A = 92-100 
B = 83-91 
C = 74-82 
D = 65-73 
F =Below 65 
 
Course Assessment  
Chapter and unit assessments will be as teacher determines.  Students will be notified 
when the assessment will take place. 
Student Contract - Personal Finance 
 
I have read and had explained in detail the guidelines and expectations set forth for 
Personal Finance.  I understand that successful completion of this course will be based 
largely upon my following these guidelines and expectations.  As it is my intention to 
successfully complete this course with a passing grade and credit granted, I agree to 
follow all of the guidelines given. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Date 
 
 
 
Grade I will work to earn in Personal Finance:  _____________________________ 
