Vishwakarma Institute of Technology, Pune                 Issue 01 : Rev No. 1 : Dt. 01/07/18 
 
FF No. : 654 
Financial Management and Costing 
Course Prerequisites: 
Basic concepts of cost, profit, loss, debit and credit. 
 
Course Objectives: 
Students will be able to: 
1. Understand, analyze and interpret financial statements 
2. Understand and concept of financial accounting for analysis of financial statements of a 
business. 
3. Develop an ability of decision making about investments. 
 
 Credits: 2                                                        Teaching Scheme Theory: 2 Hours/Week 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
Course Relevance: Basic knowledge of Finance for working in a industry  
SECTION-1 
 
1. Financial Statement Analysis- Nature and Scope of Finance Function; Financial goal 
profit vs. wealth, Maximization; Scope and Functions of Financial Management, Financial 
Planning and Forecasting. Budgets & Budgetary Control: Types of Budget, Preparation of 
Budgets: Operational & Financial Budgets, Financing and Dividend decisions. Types of 
accounts, bookkeeping, Profit and Loss Account and Balance Sheet, Cash Flow Statement 
2. Capital Budgeting and ratio Analysis -Ratio Analysis Classification, Ratio Analysis and 
its limitations. Types of Ratios, Activity Turnover, Profitability, Liquidity, etc., B: Common 
Size Statement, Index Statement, Capital Budgeting - Nature of Investment decisions; 
Investment evaluation criteria - Non-DCF & DCF Techniques, PBP, Discounted PBP, PI, 
ARR, Annual Worth 
 
3. Working Capital Management - Meaning, significance and types of working capital; 
calculating operating cycle period and estimation of working capital requirements; sources of 
working capital, NPV and IRR comparison; Capital rationing. Various committee reports on 
bank finance; Dimensions of working capital management. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vishwakarma Institute of Technology, Pune                 Issue 01 : Rev No. 1 : Dt. 01/07/18 
 
                                                        SECTION-1I 
4. Introduction to concept of Cost and Overheads - Cost, Cost Centre, Cost Unit, Elements 
of Cost: Material Cost. Different methods of pricing of issue of materials Labour Cost: Direct 
& Indirect cost, Different methods, Direct Expenses: Constituents and Significance, Prime 
Cost, Classification: Production, Office & Administration, Selling & Distribution. Treatment 
of Overheads: Collection ,Primary and Secondary Distribution and Absorption of Overheads 
Machine, Labour hour rate, Under/Over Absorption of Overheads, Preparation of Cost Sheet 
 
5. Costing Methods - Job Costing, Unit Costing, Contract Costing, Process Costing, Activity 
Based Costing Simple numerical on various methods of costing to enable ascertains cost of 
product. Standard costing: Concept, Standard Cost, Standard costing. Calculation of Variance 
Numerical on calculation of variances, Variance – Variance Analysis 
 
6. Marginal Costing and Break Even Analysis - Fixed & Variable (Marginal) Cost, 
Marginal Cost. Applications of Marginal Costing in Decision-making: Product Mix, Profit 
Planning, Make or Buy Decisions. Limiting Factor, Cost Volume Profit Analysis, Concept of 
Break-Even, P/V Ratio and Margin of Safety 
List of Tutorials: (Any Three) 
1.Capital financing 
2.Working capital finance 
3.Preparation of Journal entries, Ledgers 
4.Profit and Loss Account and Balance Sheet 
5.Ratio Analysis  
6.Investment decisions 
7.Product Costing 
9.Service Costing. 
10.Process Costing 
List of Practicals: (Any Six) 
1. Case study on sources of capital and working capital 
2. Case study on assessment of working capital 
3. Studying and understanding Financial Statements - Profit and Loss 
4. Studying and understanding Financial Statements - Balance sheet 
5. Studying and understanding various financial ratios used in practice 
6. Studying and understanding various financial ratios for decision making 
7. Case study on Analysis of published results of an organisation – Manufacturing 
8. Case study on Analysis of published results of an organisation – Service industry 
9. Prepare a cost sheet to estimate the cost of any product10. Prepare a cost sheet any process 
11. Case study on use Marginal Costing to determine Break Even Point and profitability  
12. Case study on use Marginal Costing to determine profitability 
Vishwakarma Institute of Technology, Pune                 Issue 01 : Rev No. 1 : Dt. 01/07/18 
 
List of Projects: 
1.Budgeting including sources of capital financing 
2.Budgeting including sources of working capital finance 
3.Preparation of Journal entries, Ledgers 
4.Preparation Profit and Loss Account and Balance Sheet 
5.Preparation of Balance Sheet 
6.Ratio Analysis based on real life data from project on Profit and loss and Balance sheet 
7.Compare Analysis of published results of organisations to enable investment decision 
8.Apply Product Costing to estimate cost of any process used in practice 
9.Apply Service Costing to estimate cost of any process used in practice 
10.Apply Process Costing to estimate cost of any process used in practice 
11.Apply Standard Costing to estimate cost of any process used in practice 
12.Apply Marginal Costing to determine Break Even Point and profitability 
List of Course Seminar Topics: 
1.Sources of Capital Financing 
2.Working Capital Management 
3.Profit and Loss Account 
4.Balance Sheet 
5.Turnover and Ratios 
6.Taxation 
7.Product Costing 
8.Service Costing 
9.Process Costing 
10.Investment Decisions 
List of Course Group Discussion Topics: 
1.Sources of Capital Financing  - Bank or Investors. 
2.Working Capital Management - Which is better  - Less or More? 
3.Profit and Loss Account  
4.Balance Sheet - Effect on share prices. 
5.Turnover and Ratios - which should be focused on? 
6.Taxation - Fair or Unfair in India 
7.Product Costing - does it drive Profits or Markets? 
8.Service Costing - Quality or Cost? 
9.Process Costing - Automation or Manual Labour? 
10.Investment Decisions - Guts or Statistics? 
 
Vishwakarma Institute of Technology, Pune                 Issue 01 : Rev No. 1 : Dt. 01/07/18 
 
List of Home Assignments: 
Design: 
1. 
Design a cost estimate for running a Shoe Company. 
2. 
Design a cost estimate for running a Fabrication Shop. 
3. 
Design a cost estimate for running an Online Book Company. 
4. 
Design a cost estimate for running a Grocery Company. 
5. 
Design a cost estimate for running a Data Science Company. 
Case Studies : 
1.Ratio Analysis based on real life data from project on Profit and loss and Balance sheet in 
any one sector Company ( KPO/BPO, Manufacturing, Pharma,.... 
2.Compare Analysis of published results of organisations to enable investment decision 
3.Apply Product Costing to estimate cost of any process used in any one sector Company ( 
KPO/BPO, Manufacturing, Pharma,.... 
4.Apply Service Costing to estimate cost of any process used in any one sector Company ( 
KPO/BPO, Manufacturing, Pharma,.... 
5.Apply Process Costing to estimate cost of any process used in any one sector Company ( 
KPO/BPO, Manufacturing, Pharma,.... 
 
Blog 
1. Taxation 
2. Product Costing 
3. Service Costing 
4. Process Costing 
5. Investment Decisions 
 
Surveys 
1. Interest Rates 
2. Domestic Investment Decisions 
3. Industrial Investment Decisions 
4. Government Schemes 
5. Suggestions about taxation. 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Prasanna Chandra, Financial Management – Theory and Practi 
ce, Edition 8, 2011, Tata McGraw Hill Education, 
2. B. K. Bhar, Cost Accounting– Methods and Problems, Academi 
c Publishers,1980 
3. M.Y. Khan and P K Jain, Financial Management: Text, Proble 
ms and Cases, Tata McGraw Hill Education 
4.Amitabha Mukherjee and Mohammed Hani, Modern Accountancy, Edition 2, 2002, Tata 
McGraw Hill Education 
 
 
 
Vishwakarma Institute of Technology, Pune                 Issue 01 : Rev No. 1 : Dt. 01/07/18 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Paresh P. Shah, Financial Management, Reprint No. 2 2011, Biztantra, New Delhi, 
2. S. N. Maheshwari, Introduction to Accountancy, Edition 11, 2013, Vikas Publishing House 
3. M. Y. Khan, P. K. Jain, Management Accounting –Text, Problems, Cases, Edition No. 
Tata McGraw Hill Publishers, 2013 
Course Outcomes: 
1.Understand and analyze financial statements and budgeting, interpret accounting ratios 
2.Understand the concepts of Capital Budgeting and Working Capital management 
3.Understand the mechanics of financial accounting for preparation of financial statements 
to ascertain the performance and financial position of a business 
4.Classify, apply different types of costs and overheads to ascertain costs of a product/ process 
5.Apply costing methods as per  the suitability for various production processes and services. 
6.Develop decision making of optimum product mix, profit planning, make or buy decisions 
CO PO Map  
CO 1,2,3,4,5,6 -> PO 1,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 
Job Mapping: 
Better growth opportunities for higher Management positions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
