 
MASKWACIS CULTURAL COLLEGE 
 
MGMT1560 - Introduction to Finance 
Course Outline Spring 2018 
 
 
Instructor: 
 
 
Sunny Yeung, BA, BComm, CPA, CMA 
Class Dates and times 
Mondays and Wednesdays 5:00PM to 8:00PM 
E-mail:  
 
 
syeung@mccedu.ca 
Required Text: 
 
Fundamentals of Corporate Finance 8th Canadian Edition 
Supplementary: 
 
The Wall Street Journal, Financial Times, Business Week, 
among others. 
Prerequisite(s): 
 
 
 
 
Course Description 
This course provides an introduction to the basic concepts and principles of finance. The material to be 
covered will include: financial markets and institutions, investments, and managerial finance. 
 
Course Objective: 
The purpose of this course is to introduce the student to basic principles of finance.  These principles are the basic 
knowledge for either a career in corporate finance or further education in the area of investments, real estate, 
banking, and insurance.  It is also an excellent primer for non-finance majors wanting to familiarize with the 
world of finance.  The primary goal of this course is to impart the knowledge to allow you to intelligently solve 
practical business problems.  To achieve this goal, it is crucial that you have a sound understanding of finance 
theory.  As such, the course will be theoretical in nature, often requiring rigorous quantitative analysis. 
 
Performance Objectives: 
1. To gain a basic understanding of fundamental finance theories, e.g., time value of money. 
2. To apply finance concepts to real finance problems. 
3. To become familiar with finance terminology. 
 
Learning Outcomes/Objectives:  
Introduction to Finance will provide students the knowledge of major concepts and topics of finance. On 
successful completion of this course, students will be able to apply these concepts; and, most importantly, be 
able to think logically and systematically in financial terms. More specifically, student will: 
1. Explain the Goal of Financial Management and the conflicts of interest between managers and owners. 
2. Compute the future value, present value and the rate of return on an investment for projects that involve 
single or multiple cash flow(s). 
3. Know the important types of bonds and understand the determinants of bond yields. 
4. Understand the impact of inflation on interest rates and the term structure of interest rates. 
5. Recognize how stock prices depend on future dividends and be able to compute stock prices using the 
dividend growth model. 
6. Understand how financial markets work and know the historical rate of returns and risks on various types 
of investments. 
7. Calculate expected value and standard deviation (risk) of investment returns and understand the risk-
return tradeoff. 
8. Appreciate the impact of diversification and have a basic understanding of the systematic risk principle. 
9. Know the various ways in which capital can be raised and determine a firm’s overall cost of capital. 
 
MASKWACIS CULTURAL COLLEGE 
Teaching Methodology 
This course uses a combination of lecture about theoretical and practical topics, reading, case studies, discussion 
board, and experiential exercises in order to expose students to the challenges faced in the finance field.  I expect 
you to be an active participant in this learning process by discussing theoretical topics, solving practical problems 
in and out the class, writing reports about financial events and working in groups.  I also recommend that you use 
the discussion board from Blackboard provided in this class.  Moreover, do not hesitate to contact me for 
assistance whenever necessary.  
You must be PROACTIVE to succeed in this course. Postings in the Announcements section will keep you updated 
as much as possible; however, do not rely on being reminded of upcoming events by the instructor. You are 
responsible for all activities and deadlines listed in this syllabus. Read it thoroughly and make note of important 
dates and deadlines. The Blackboard software has a calendar function that you might want to use to remind you of 
certain dates. 
 
Course Policies 
Attendance:   
• 
It is the students' responsibility to attend class and obtain assignments, lectures, notes, etc., for the days 
missed.  Failure to attend class regularly will seriously affect the student's ability to comprehend the 
material. 
• 
As you can see from the schedule, we will be investigating a new topic at nearly every class, so it is critical 
that you come to class.  Students are expected to be on time, to be prepared for class, and to take notes 
during class lectures. The instructor will only clarify the class lectures, not "re-lecture." 
• 
Students are asked to show up for class on time. Repeated class disturbances will result in restricted 
admission. 
• 
Students are asked to show courtesy to other students. All cell phones, pagers, IPods, MP3 and other 
electronic devices are to be turned off before class. Students will be asked to leave class if phones or 
other devices interrupt. Students who disturb classmates by talking during class will also be asked to 
leave. 
• 
10% will be deducted from any student’s grade if their cell phone rings during an exam. Repeated 
interruption from these items will result in the student being dismissed from the class. No student will be 
allowed to use a cell phone’s calculator feature during an exam. 
 
Laptops:  
I encourage you to use your laptop for this course in class. However, the use of your laptop is strictly for class 
activities such as taking notes, referring to a spreadsheet, or in occasions when we need to search the 
network. You are not allowed to connect the laptop to networks such as Messenger, Yahoo Messenger, Skype, 
and should not be doing any non-class activities during class time. You will be asked to leave the classroom if 
fail to comply this policy.  
 
Quizzes and Exams: 
2 quizzes constitute 30% of class marks. 
 
1 mid-term constitutes 30%. 
 
1 final exam constitutes 40%. 
 
Note: Nobody will have the opportunity to do extra work, such as additional exams, extra assignments, etc., to 
improve a grade.  
 
 
MASKWACIS CULTURAL COLLEGE 
Grading Policy: 
 
96 – 100% 
A+ 
91 – 95% 
A 
86 – 90% 
A- 
81 – 85% 
B+ 
76 – 80% 
B 
71 – 75% 
C+ 
66 – 70% 
C 
60 – 65% 
D 
Below 60% 
F 
 
Classroom Behavior 
The Maskwacis Cultural College encourages classroom discussion and academic debate as an essential 
intellectual activity.  It is essential that students learn to express and defend their beliefs, but it is also 
essential that they learn to listen and respond respectfully to others whose beliefs they may not share.  MCC 
will always tolerate diverse, unorthodox, and unpopular points of view, but it will not tolerate condescending or 
insulting remarks.  When students verbally abuse or ridicule and intimidate others whose views they do not 
agree with, they subvert the free exchange of ideas that should characterize a university classroom.  If their 
actions are deemed by the professor to be disruptive, they will be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, 
which may include being involuntarily withdrawn from the class. 
  
Copyright Restrictions 
The Copyright Act of 1976 grants to copyright owners the exclusive right to reproduce their works and 
distribute copies of their work.  Works that receive copyright protection include published works such as a 
textbook.  Copying a textbook without permission from the owner of the copyright may constitute copyright 
infringement.  Civil and criminal penalties may be assessed for copyright infringement.  Civil penalties include 
damages up to $100,000; criminal penalties include a fine up to $250,000 and imprisonment. 
  
Copyright laws do not allow students and professors to make photocopies of copyrighted materials, but you 
may copy a limited portion of a work, such an article from a journal or a chapter from a book for your own 
personal academic use or, in the case of a professor, for personal, limited classroom use.  In general, the 
extent of your copying should not suggest that the purpose or the effect of your copying is to avoid paying for 
the materials.  And, of course, you may not sell these copies for a profit.  Thus, students who copy textbooks to 
avoid buying them or professors who provide photocopies of textbooks to enable students to save money are 
violating the law. 
 
Plagiarism and Cheating 
Plagiarism is the presentation of someone else’s work as one’s own.  Recently, the Internet has complicated 
the picture.  Getting something from the Internet and presenting it as one’s own is still plagiarism.  Copying 
another student’s paper or a portion of the paper - is usually called “copying”.  Neither plagiarism nor copying 
will be tolerated.  If a student has committed plagiarism, the students will receive a grade of ‘F’ in the course  
 
MASKWACIS CULTURAL COLLEGE 
 
Safety and Security- You are the Difference 
Your safety and security are of prime concern here at MCC to ensure the College is a safe place to learn. MCC 
is not, however, exempt from crime. To be safe and secure, you must take common sense precautions. Be alert 
and aware of those around you; look out for the safety of others. Do not leave valuables unattended; do not 
attempt to touch or interfere with our wildlife. 
  
Student Responsibility For Dropping a Course 
It is the responsibility of the STUDENT to drop the course before the drop date.  Faculty are not responsible for 
dropping students who suspend class attendance. 
  
Class Schedule 
 
Lecture 
Date 
Topic 
Reading 
Quiz/Exam 
Marks 
1 
2-May-18 
Introduction to Corporate Finance 
Chapter 1 
 
2 
7-May-18 
Financial Statements and Taxes 
Chapter 2  
 
3 
9-May-18 
Cash Flow and Ratio Analysis 
Chapter 3 
Quiz 1 
15% 
4 
14-May-18 
Financial Planning and Corporate Growth 
Chapter 4 
 
5 
16-May-18 
Time Value of Money 
Chapter 5 
 
6 
23-May-18 
Discounted Cash Flow Valuation. 
Chapter 6 
Mid-term 
30% 
7 
28-May-18 
Interest rates and Bond Valuation 
Chapter 7 
 
8 
30-May-18 
Stock Valuation 
Chapter 8 
 
9 
4-Jun-18 
NPV and Other Investment Criteria 
Chapter 9 
Quiz 2 
15% 
10 
6-Jun-18 
Capital Investment Decisions 
Chapter 10 
 
 
Final   
11th or 13th Jun 
  
Final Exam 
40% 
 
Academic approval by  
 
     
President: Dr. Claudine Louis  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cultural content approved by   
  
 
Elder: Jerry Saddleback 
 
 
Situations not discussed in this outline or any disputes will be managed according to the policies 
of Maskwacis Cultural College.  
