McMaster University, Department of Economics, ECON 2I03-C01(2299) 
1 | P a g e  
 
ECONOMICS 2I03  
Financial Economics  
Summer 2022 (Fully in-person) 
 
Instructor: Rizwan Tahir  
 
 
Email: tahirr1@mcmaster.ca 
Office: KTH 405, 905 525 9140 ext. 23826  
Office Hours: TBA   
 
Lecture: Tuesday/Thursday 1 pm to 4 PM  (HH 109) 
 
Teaching Assistant(s): 
The name, office hours, and email address of the teaching assistant(s) will be posted on 
Avenue to Learn 
 
 Course Description:  
This course focuses on the financial sector. Topics include the role of capital markets in 
facilitating investment and growth, bond markets, & stock markets. It analyses behavior 
of interest rates and discusses Banking and the Management of Financial Institutions.  
Prerequisite(s):  
ECON 1B03 and ECON 1BB3 (or ARTSSCI 2E03  
Not open to students with credit or registration in COMMERCE 2FA3  
 
Required Textbook:  
The Economics of Money, Banking and Financial Markets 7th Canadian Edition, by Fredric S. 
Mishkin, 2020  
Additional Text:  
Corporate Finance, 3rd Canadian Edition, by Jonathan Berk, Peter Demarzo & David 
Stangeland, 2015, Pearson  
 
Learning Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, students should be able to  
• Understand the primary functions of the Financial System  
• Understand the structure of the Financial Markets  
• 
Understand time value of money  
• 
Understand how to value bonds & stocks  
• Explain the Financial Market Instruments  
• Understand time value of money and Valuation of Financial assets  
• Explain the Functions of Financial Intermediaries  
• Explain the types of Financial Intermediaries  
• Explain Regulation of Financial Markets  
• Explain the role of financial regulatory authorities  
• Explain the role of central banking  
McMaster University, Department of Economics, ECON 2I03-C01(2299) 
2 | P a g e  
 
Course Website  
Avenue to Learn (avenue.mcmaster.ca) is McMaster’s learning management system and is 
where all the course material will be posted. Course material is posted under the ‘Content 
Tab’ on Avenue and includes:  
• 
Course Outline  
• 
PowerPoint Notes  
• 
Selected textbook questions and answers  
• 
Office hours of the instructor and teaching assistant  
• 
Grades  
• 
Announcements  
 
 
Evaluation  
Component 
Weight 
 Quizzes  
10%  
Class participation (iClicker)  
Optional 
5% 
Term Test-1 
25% 
Term Test-2 
25% 
Final Exam 
35%, 40% (without 
iClickers 
 
Quizzes  
Quizzes will be administered through Avenue to Learn. All Quizzes will consist of 
Multiple-Choice questions. See below the detail information on the coverage, 
availability, and due dates. 
 
iClickers 
We will make use of iclickers (or “clickers”) – an electronic response system that allows 
you to register an answer to questions asked in class. Best 80% clicker sessions will 
count for 5% of the course grade.  
Please visit the following link to see how you can participate in the clicker sessions. 
 https://macmillan.force.com/iclicker/s/article/iClicker-Student-App-Purchasing-
Participation-Options 
 You can participate using a smart device. Please follow the link, if you do not have 
an account: https://app.reef-education.com/#/account/create or https://app.reef-
education.com/#/login to login and register for the course. Please use your "mac ID" 
and NOT your "student ID" to register. You will find the course as "ECON-2I03-S22”  
 
McMaster University, Department of Economics, ECON 2I03-C01(2299) 
3 | P a g e  
 
According to McMaster University Academic Integrity Policy  
(http://www.mcmaster.ca/policy/Students-AcademicStudies/AcademicIntegrity.pdf) 
It shall be an offence knowingly to: 
q) impersonate another student either in person or electronically for the purpose of 
 
academic assessment. 
 
Test #1 & Test #2 
Both tests, 60 minutes long, will consist of 40 multiple choice questions. The material for 
each test is outlined below. (Note: both tests will be held during lecture time) 
 
 Final Exam  
The final exam will be 2 hours in length and will be written during the final exam 
period. The exam will consist of 70 multiple choice questions and one short answer 
question and is cumulative.  
 
Missing Quizzes and/or tests 
• 
There will be no makeup quizzes or makeup tests 
• 
If you miss a test or quiz, you will get a grade of zero unless you complete and 
submit a McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) which can be found at 
https://www.mcmaster.ca/msaf/ 
• 
With approved MASF, weight of the missed quiz or test will be shifted towards 
final exam.  
• 
NOTE: MSAF is not accepted for class participation through iclickers 
 
Use of Calculators  
Only the Casio FX-991 MS or MS plus series calculator may be used for tests and the 
exam (available in the bookstore).  
 
Photo ID  
You will be required to show your university photo ID at all tests and the exam.  
 
Scan Sheets 
For all tests and the final examination multiple choice questions to be answered on scan 
sheets. You must use an HB pencil to fill in these sheets and you are responsible for 
providing your own.  
 
 
 
 
 
McMaster University, Department of Economics, ECON 2I03-C01(2299) 
4 | P a g e  
 
Important Dates 
• Test # 1 
 
Tuesday July 7th    
• Test # 2 
 
 Tuesday, July 21st     
• 
Note: Both term tests will be held during the class time  
• Final Exam:  
 
Thursday, August 4th   
• Course Withdrawal  
Wednesday, July 20th   
 
Email Policy:  
All official McMaster correspondence is sent to your McMaster account so please 
check it on a regular basis. Any ‘group’ emails I send to the class will be sent to your 
McMaster account  
The following are usually helpful if you want to send me an email.  
1. Send the email to tahirr1@mcmaster.ca 
2. I will try to answer all emails within 48 hours. It takes longer to reply to emails 
send through my learning space. If I have not responded within 48 hours, please 
re-send your email, or contact me in person. 
3. ALWAYS include the course code in the subject line of your email (2H03).  
4. Please also include your name and student number at the bottom of your email 
so that I know who you are.  
5. Email me from your McMaster email account, not from Yahoo or other sorts. 
McMaster uses email filters that may filter your email into a ‘junk’ or ‘spam’ 
folder and so emailing from your McMaster account increases the chances that I 
will receive your email.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
McMaster University, Department of Economics, ECON 2I03-C01(2299) 
5 | P a g e  
 
Detailed Reading Schedule 
 
Dates 
Topics/Readings 
Quizzes on Avenue 
June 21st   
Introduction: 
Chapters 1, 2 & 3 (RT)* 
 
June 23rd 
 The Time Value of Money 
Chapter 4 (AT)** 
 
Quiz #1 Covers chapters 1,2 &3 (RT)  
 Available on June 27 from 9 am to 9 
pm 
June 28th   
 Basic Valuation 
Valuing Bonds 
Chapter 6 (AT) 
 
June 30th   
 Financial Markets 
Understanding Interest rates 
The behaviour of interest rate 
Chapter 5 (RT) 
Quiz #2 Covers chapter 4& 6 (AT) 
Available on July 04 from 9 am to 9 
pm 
July 5th   
The Risk and Term structure of interest rate 
The stock Market 
Chapter 6(RT) 
 
July 7th 
TEST # 1 Covers chapters 1,2,3(RT) & 4, 6 (AT) 
 
July 12th 
 Valuing Stocks 
Chapter 7 (AT) 
Quiz #3 Covers chapter 5,6 (RT) 
 Available on July 11 from 9 am to 9 
pm 
July 14th 
 Financial Institutions 
Chapter 8 (RT) 
 
July 19th   
Financial Institutions ... Continue 
Chapters 9 (RT)  
 
Quiz #4 Covers chapter 7 & 8(RT) 
 Available on July 18 from 9 am to 9 
pm 
July 21st   
 
 TEST # 2 Covers chapters 7(AT) & 5,6 & 8 (RT) 
 
July 26th 
Financial Institutions ... Continue 
Chapters 10 (RT) 
 
 
July 28th 
Central Banking 
Chapter 14, 15, 16(RT) 
Quiz #5 Covers chapter 9, & 10 (RT) 
 Available on July 27 from 9 am to 9 
pm 
August 2nd   Review 
Quiz #6 (Covers chapter 14, 15 & 16) 
 Available on August 01 from 9 am to 
9 pm 
August 4th   Final Exam 
 
*Required Text; ** Additional Text 
 
 
 
 
McMaster University, Department of Economics, ECON 2I03-C01(2299) 
6 | P a g e  
 
University Policies 
CONDUCT EXPECTATIONS 
As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, respectful and 
dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These expectations are described in the 
Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students share the responsibility of maintaining a positive 
environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community members, whether in person or 
online. 
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in virtual learning 
environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or interfere with reasonable 
participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that interfere with university functions on online 
platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. 
Outcomes may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility Services (SAS) at 
905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program Coordinator. For further 
information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities policy. 
REQUESTS FOR RELIEF FOR MISSED ACADEMIC TERM WORK 
McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, students should review 
and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION FOR RELIGIOUS, INDIGENOUS OR SPIRITUAL OBSERVANCES (RISO) 
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances should follow the 
procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their Faculty Office normally within 
10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for accommodation or to the Registrar's 
Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as soon as possible to make 
alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
COPYRIGHT AND RECORDING 
Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material provided by an 
instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law protect every original literary, 
dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University instructors 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. Recording may be done 
by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a student for the purpose of personal study. 
Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with 
the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
EXTREME CIRCUMSTANCES 
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances 
(e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through regular McMaster 
communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, A2L and/or McMaster email. 
McMaster University, Department of Economics, ECON 2I03-C01(2299) 
7 | P a g e  
 
 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY 
You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning 
process. Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic 
integrity. It is your responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could 
result in unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious 
consequences, e.g. the grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on 
the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or 
suspension or expulsion from the university. For information on the various types of 
academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located 
at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 
•     plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has 
been obtained. 
•     improper collaboration in group work. 
copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 
 
 
 
COURSES WITH AN ON-LINE ELEMENT 
Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn (A2L), LearnLink, web 
pages, capa, Moodle, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such 
as first and last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may 
become apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent 
on the technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed 
consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please 
discuss this with the course instructor. 
 
 
