 
 
 
 
Page 1 of 8 
We recognize and acknowledge that McMaster University meets and learns on the traditional territories of the Mississauga and Haudenosaunee nations, and 
within the lands protected by the “Dish With One Spoon” wampum, an agreement amongst all allied Nations to peaceably share and care for the resources 
around the Great Lakes. 
 
MATH 2FM3 – Introduction to Mathematical Finance  
2023 Spring Term 
 Instructor: Xuwei Yang 
|  
E-mail: yangx212@mcmaster.ca 
| 
Office: HH 103E 
Office Hours: Wed, 3:00 pm – 4:00 pm and/or by appointment (either in-person or virtually)  
 
Lecture 
Days and Times: Tuesday and Thursday, 7:00 pm – 10:00 pm  
Dates: May 1, 2023 – June 16, 2023  
Classroom: ETB 235  
Tutorial 
Days and Times: Not Available  
Tutors and Office Hours: Not Available  
Materials & Fees  
Textbook: Mathematics of Investment and Credit, 7th edition, by Samuel A. Broverman, published by 
Actex Publications. There is an accompanying solutions manual whose purchase is optional 
Calculator: Only the standard Casio fx 991 MS or MS Plus calculator is permitted. 
 
Course Website 
Course materials and announcements will be posted on Avenue to Learn. Please check it regularly.  
 
Course Description 
Nominal and eﬀective rates of interest and discount, forces of interest and discount, compound interest, 
annuities certain; amortization, sinking funds, bonds, security evaluation, determination of yields; rates of 
return, duration, immunization, swaps.  
Prerequisite(s): One of MATH-1A03, 1LS3, 1M03, 1N03, 1X03, 1Z04, 1ZA3, ARTSSCI 1D06 A/B, ISCI 1A24 
A/B  
 
Anti-requisite(s): MATH 2K03  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 8 
 
Course and Learning Objectives 
Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to: 
• Deﬁne, calculate, and recognize the deﬁnitions of the following terms: interest rate, simple interest, 
compound interest, accumulation function, future value, current value, present value, net present value, 
discount factor, discount rate, convertible m-thly, nominal rate, eﬀective rate, inﬂation and real rate of 
interest, force of interest, equation of value. 
• Deﬁne, calculate, and recognize the deﬁnitions of the following terms: annuity-immediate, annuity due, 
perpetuity, payable m-thly or payable continuously, level payment annuity, arithmetic 
increasing/decreasing annuity, geometric increasing/decreasing annuity, term of annuity.  
• Deﬁne, calculate, and recognize the deﬁnitions of the following terms: principal, interest, term of loan, 
outstanding balance, ﬁnal payment (drop payment, balloon payment), amortization. 
• Deﬁne, calculate, and recognize the deﬁnitions of the following terms: price, book value, amortization 
of premium, accumulation of discount, redemption value, par value/face value, yield rate, coupon, 
coupon rate, term of bond, callable/non-callable.  
• Deﬁne, calculate, and recognize the deﬁnitions of the following terms: yield rate/rate of return, dollar-
weighted rate of return, time-weighted rate of return, current value, duration (Macaulay and modiﬁed), 
convexity (Macaulay and modiﬁed), portfolio, spot rate, forward rate, yield curve, stock price, stock 
dividend. 
• Deﬁne, calculate, and recognize the deﬁnitions of the following terms: cash ﬂow matching, 
immunization (including full immunization), Redington immunization. 
• Deﬁne, calculate, and recognize the deﬁnitions of the following terms: swap rate, swap term. 
• Deﬁne, calculate, and recognize the key concepts concerning the determinants of interest rates and the 
components of interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 8 
 
Course Overview and Assessment  
Topics  
Topics 
Chapter (7th Edition) 
Schedule 
Introduction and Interest Rate 
Measurement 
1  
Week 1 
Valuation of Annuities 
2 
Week 1-2 
Loan Repayment 
3 
Week 2-3 
Bond Valuation 
4 
Week 4 
Measuring the Rate of Return of 
an Investment 
5 
Week 4-5 
The Term Structure of Interest 
Rates 
6 
Week 5-6 
Cashflow Duration and 
Immunization 
7 
Week 6-7 
Interest Rate SWAPS 
8 
Week 7 
 
Evaluation 
Evaluation of the course consists of assignments, labs, midterm tests and a final exam:  
• There will be 5 assignments to be completed during the term.  Assignments will be completed online 
using the internal assignment system. Information about the assignments, including the link, will be 
provided on the course website on Avenue. Closing dates are posted on the assignment system. No late 
assignments will be accepted. 
• There will be 5 labs to be completed during the term. Labs will focus on the use of Excel and VBA to 
answer problems related to the course material. Labs will be completed online using the internal 
assignment system. Information about the assignments, including the link, will be provided on the course 
website. Closing dates are posted on the assignment system. No late assignments will be accepted.  
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 8 
 
• There will be 2 midterms, each lasting 60 minutes. More information, including the topics covered, will 
be announced in class. The tentative dates of the midterms are TBA.  
• There will be a 2.5-hour final exam at the end of the term. It will cover all course material.  
 
  Grade Component 
 Weight 
Final Examination 
40% 
Midterm Tests 1, 2 
40% = 20% + 20% 
Labs 
 10% 
Assignments 
 10% 
 
Virtual Course Delivery 
It is required that all students attend the in-person lectures. The lectures will be video recorded for 
students to review after class.  
To follow and participate in virtual classes it is expected that you have reliable access to the following:  
• A computer that meets performance requirements found here.  
• An internet connection that is fast enough to stream video.  
• Computer accessories that enable class participation, such as a microphone, speakers and 
webcam when needed.  
If you think that you will not be able to meet these requirements, please contact uts@mcmaster.ca as 
soon as you can. Please visit the Technology Resources for Students page for detailed requirements. If 
you use assistive technology or believe that our platforms might be a barrier to participating, please 
contact Student Accessibility Services, sas@mcmaster.ca, for support.  
Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work  
McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF):  In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests for 
Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 8 
 
MSAF Course Specific Information  
Absences for a longer duration or for other reasons must be reported to your Faculty/Program oﬃce, 
with documentation, and relief from term work may not necessarily be granted. The percentages of the 
missed work will be transferred to the ﬁnal examination. Please note that the MSAF may not be used for 
term work worth 25% or more. In particular, note that the MSAF cannot be used for the ﬁnal 
examination. Finally, please note that for assessments where an MSAF is used, the missed weight of the 
assessment will be moved to the ﬁnal exam.  
Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities  
Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities  policy.  
Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous Or Spiritual Observances (Riso)  
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
Courses with An On-Line Element  
Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn (A2L), LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they access the electronic components 
of a course using these elements, private information such as first and last names, user names for the 
McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the 
same course. The available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation in a course 
that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions or 
concerns about such disclosure, please discuss this with the course instructor.  
Online Proctoring  
 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 8 
Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins.   
 
Academic Integrity  
You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behavior in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity.  
It is your responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty.  
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behavior can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero on 
an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for 
academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. For information on the 
various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located at 
https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/  
 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty:  
• plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 
obtained. 
• improper collaboration in group work.  
• copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations.  
Authenticity / Plagiarism Detection  
Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their work 
electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. A2L, etc.) using 
plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for academic dishonesty. 
 
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not 
submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal verification 
that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.). For 
 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 8 
more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to the McMaster Office of Academic 
Integrity’s webpage. 
Conduct Expectations  
As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth of 
all McMaster community members, whether in person or online.  
 
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in virtual 
learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or interfere 
with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviors that interfere with 
university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx or Zoom for delivery), will be 
taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or removal of the involved 
students’ access to these platforms.  
Copyright and Recording  
Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law protect 
every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University instructors. 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. Recording 
may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a student for the 
purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may be recorded by 
others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you.  
Research Ethics - NA  
Extreme Circumstances  
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labor disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, A2L and/or McMaster email.  
 
 
Page 1 of 4 
 
We recognize and acknowledge that McMaster University meets and learns on the traditional territories of the Mississauga and Haudenosaunee nations, and 
within the lands protected by the “Dish With One Spoon” wampum, an agreement amongst all allied Nations to peaceably share and care for the resources 
around the Great Lakes. 
 
MATH 3FM3 – MATHEMATICS OF FINANCE 
2023 Fall Term  
Instructor: Dr. Anas Abdallah | E-mail: anasabdallah@mcmaster.ca | Office Hours: Monday 2:30pm-4:00pm (HH-408) 
COURSE DESCRIPTION  
This course introduces financial markets and derivatives and to the mathematics of finance. Major topics include: 
Forwards and Options, Trading strategies, Parity and other option relationships, Binomial Option Pricing, Exotic 
options, Stochastic processes and the lognormal property of stock prices, Black-Scholes formula. The material, 
together with MATH-4FM3, will form the basis of the material needed for the Investment and Financial Markets 
(IFM) exam of the Society of Actuaries and the Financial Economics exam (3F) of the Casualty Actuarial Society (CAS). 
Prerequisite(s): One of ISCI 2A18 A/B, MATH 2X03; and STATS 2D03 
COURSE AND LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
This course introduces financial markets and derivatives and the mathematics of finance. Students will learn the 
following topics: Forwards and Options, Trading strategies, Parity and other option relationships, Binomial Option 
Pricing, Exotic options, Stochastic processes and the lognormal property of stock prices, Black-Scholes formula. 
Lecture: 
• 
Days and time: Monday-Wednesday-Thursday: 5:30pm - 6:20pm 
• 
Format: in-person -- Go over the slides, fill in the blanks, solve the examples and exercises. 
• 
Room: BSB-B136 (Mon & Wed) and BSB-B135 (Thurs). 
Tutorial: 
• 
Tutor: Gujie Fu fug3@mcmasteru365.onmicrosoft.com 
• 
Day and time: T01 – Wednesday 1:30pm to 2:20pm & T02 – Wednesday 9:30am to 10:20am 
• 
Room: HH-109 (T01) and HSC-1A4 (T02). 
• 
TA Office hours: right after each tutorial (with Gujie Fu) 
 
MATERIALS & FEES  
REQUIRED MATERIALS/ RESOURCES  
Textbook:  
• Derivatives Markets (Third Edition), 2013, by McDonald, R.L., Pearson Education, ISBN: 978-0-32154-308-0. 
https://campusstore.mcmaster.ca/cgi-
mcm/ws/txsub.pl?wsTERMG1=234&wsDEPTG1=MATH&wsCOURSEG1=3FM3&wsSECTIONG1=DAY%20C01&crit_cnt=1 
Calculator:   Only the standard Casio fx 991 MS or MS Plus calculator is permitted. 
 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 
VIRTUAL COURSE DELIVERY 
To follow and participate in virtual classes it is expected that you have reliable access to the following:  
• 
A computer that meets performance requirements found here.  
• 
An internet connection that is fast enough to stream video.  
• 
Computer accessories that enable class participation, such as a microphone, speakers and webcam when needed.  
If you think that you will not be able to meet these requirements, please contact uts@mcmaster.ca as soon as you can. Please 
visit the Technology Resources for Students page for detailed requirements. If you use assistive technology or believe that our 
platforms might be a barrier to participating, please contact Student Accessibility Services, sas@mcmaster.ca, for support. 
 
 
 
COURSE OVERVIEW AND ASSESSMENT   
Final Exam: 
A 2.5-hour duration in-person final exam, worth 45% of the final grade, will be administered by the registrar.  
Mid-Term Tests: 
• 
Platform: Childsmath (in-person) 
• 
Tentative Dates: (during class time 5:30pm to 6:20pm) 
o 
Test #1 on Thursday, October 5, 2023 
o 
Test #2 on Wednesday, November 8, 2023 
o 
Test #3 on Wednesday, November 29, 2023 
• 
Room: TBD 
• 
Topic: More information will be announced in due course 
Assignments: 
• 
There will be up to 5 assignments, to be uploaded and submitted on Avenue to Learn. 
 
EVALUATION 
 
                              Tentative Marking Scheme*: 
 
       Assessment                                                         Weight 
1. Final Exam 
              45% 
 
2. Three Midterms 
              40%   
 
3. Assignments 
              15% 
 
 
* Alternate Grading Scheme may be considered at the end of the term. Please note that this alternate 
grading scheme may NOT be applied if you used an MSAF for a midterm (assignment), and we will only 
use the grades of the midterms (assignments) that were completed. 
 
Page 3 of 4 
 
 
REQUESTS FOR RELIEF FOR MISSED ACADEMIC TERM WORK  
McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF):  In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, students should review and 
follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”.  
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES  
Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility Services (SAS) at 905-525-
9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program Coordinator. For further information, consult 
McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities  policy.  
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION FOR RELIGIOUS, INDIGENOUS OR SPIRITUAL OBSERVANCES (RISO)  
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances should follow the 
procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their Faculty Office normally within 10 working 
days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their 
examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, 
assignments, and tests.  
COURSES WITH AN ON-LINE ELEMENT  
This course may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn (A2L), LearnLink, web pages, capa, Moodle, ThinkingCap, 
etc.). Students should be aware that, when they access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private 
information such as first and last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation 
in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure.   If you have any questions or concerns about 
such disclosure, please discuss this with the course instructor.  
ONLINE PROCTORING  
This course may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require students to turn on their video 
camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other 
applications/software during tests or exams. This software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins.   
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY  
You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. Academic 
credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity.  
It is your responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty.  
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned academic 
credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero on an assignment, loss 
of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or 
suspension or expulsion from the university. For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please 
refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- 
guidelines/  
 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty:  
• 
plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been obtained. 
• 
improper collaboration in group work.  
• 
copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations.  
 
 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 
AUTHENTICITY / PLAGIARISM DETECTION  
This course may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of student submitted 
work. Students will be expected to submit their work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via Avenue to 
Learn (A2L) plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for academic dishonesty.  
 
Students who do not wish to submit their work through A2L and/or Turnitin.com must still submit an electronic 
and/or hardcopy to the instructor. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not submit work to 
Turnitin.com or A2L. All submitted work is subject to normal verification that standards of academic integrity have 
been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.). For more details about McMaster use of Turnitin.com please 
go to http://www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
CONDUCT EXPECTATIONS  
As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, respectful and 
dignified interactions within all our living, learning and working communities. These expectations are described in 
the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students share the responsibility of maintaining a 
positive environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community members, whether in 
person or online.  
 
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in virtual learning 
environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or interfere with reasonable 
participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that interfere with university functions on 
online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be 
investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms.  
COPYRIGHT AND RECORDING  
Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material provided by an 
instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law protect every original literary, 
dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University instructors.  
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. Recording may be 
done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a student for the purpose of personal 
study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may be recorded by others during the class. Please 
speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you.  
RESEARCH ETHICS – NA 
EXTREME CIRCUMSTANCES  
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances 
(e.g., severe weather, labor disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through regular McMaster 
communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, A2L and/or McMaster email.  
