FINA 200 – Personal Finance Section EC 
Outline – Winter 2024 
 
This syllabus is subject to change and any changes will be posted in the Announcements section of 
your eConcordia course. 
 
Disclaimer: In the event that the University is unable to provide services or that courses are interrupted 
due to events beyond the reasonable control of the University, including classroom or online 
disruptions, the University or professor reserves the right to modify any element contained in the 
course outline including but not limited to the grading scheme and the weight accorded to exams or 
assignments. 
 
About the Course 
Program: 
Undergraduate: 3 credits 
Term: Winter (January 15 – April 15, 2024) 
Faculty: John Molson School of Business 
Department: Finance 
Instructor 
The instructor for this course is Nadine Parla. 
Nadine Parla is a CPA, CA with over 15 years of financial planning experience. 
Contact Information 
You can email the course professor at: fina200@econcordia.com . This email address allows you to contact 
your professor directly with any general inquiries. If you have any questions or concerns about the course, or if 
there is a delay in hearing back from your Teaching Assistant (TA), please do not hesitate to use this email. 
The TA that has been assigned to you is listed on the main course page, under Your Assigned TA:  
 
 
Note: Please email your TA with any questions or concerns you have, or if you require further feedback. Also, 
allow for a 24-hour response time during the week (Monday-Friday). Teaching Assistants check their 
messages once over the 48-hour weekend period and are not available on statutory or university holidays. 
 
Course Description 
This course is offered online. It is designed to help students better understand the planning and management 
of their current and future financial affairs. The course introduces the terminology and basic concepts 
underlying personal financial management. It helps students set goals and develop skills to conduct basic 
research when making personal financial decisions. 
Course Objectives 
By the end of this course, you will learn the fundamentals of personal finance and understand how to: 
• Establish and prioritize personal financial goals with the consideration of the time value of money on your 
savings and investment plan. 
• Prepare your personal financial statements (net worth statement, cash flow) and create a budget. 
• Understand how to calculate your federal personal tax liability. 
• Build and maintain good credit through debt management (i.e. credit cards and consumer loans) and 
understand loan payment calculations (including mortgages). 
• Manage risk through insurance. 
• Analyze different investment options to build a savings and investment plan. 
• Plan for retirement by estimating planned retirement income, spending needs and housing needs. 
• Understand the importance of having an estate plan. 
Online Course Material 
The material for this course can only be accessed through eConcordia and is hosted on eConcordia Moodle 
(This course does not use Concordia Moodle). This online course consists of the required online textbook and 
the FINA 200 course website which includes lectures, cases, quizzes, practice quizzes, cases and exams, 
practice cases and exams, videos, Q&A Forum and other course material.  
 
Each lesson module contains three sections:  
1. Lesson’s To Do List – containing an intro video, readings, updates, review questions and financial 
planning problems. 
2. Lesson’s Helpful Resources – containing summary notes (can be viewed either in PDF format or 
interactive lecture-style notes) and lesson glossary. 
3. Time to Test Yourself – containing a practice quiz.  
 
The text required for this course is only available through eConcordia via the course website and is included in 
the online textbook fee. 
Online Textbook 
Madura, Jeff, Singh Gill, Hardeep, Personal Finance, Pearson Canada Inc., 5th Canadian Edition is only 
available through the course website.  As the cases, quizzes and final exam are based on this version, no 
other edition can be used as a substitute.  Please consult the documents under Updates to be read jointly with 
the online textbook. 
• 
In order to access your textbook, please see the Textbook Access instructions under the Getting 
Started section of your course. 
Calculator 
Students also require a calculator to complete the problems on the quizzes, cases and final exam. The 
calculator must not be programmable. A financial calculator is strongly recommended for this course. I 
personally suggest the Texas Instruments BAII+ as the online textbook uses this model with their examples. 
Course Website 
The course website can be accessed at www.econcordia.com through the eConcordia Moodle Dashboard.  
Your account will allow you to access the online course material, which includes lectures, videos, notes, Q & A 
Forum, all graded course components, useful links, readings and many more resources from the course 
website for the duration of the term. 
Students will have access to the course content for 6 months after the end of the term for which you are 
registered. After 6 months, students will still have access to their grades through their eConcordia account. 
 
Assessments 
Graded Assessments 
2 Quizzes + 2 Case Studies 
Chapters Covered* 
70% 
Online Individual Quiz 1 
Chapters 1-6 
15% 
Online Individual Case 1 
Chapters 1-7 
20% 
Online Individual Quiz 2 
Chapters 7-10, 13 
15% 
Online Individual Case 2 
Chapters 8-10, 13-16 
20% 
Online Individual Final Examination 
All assigned chapters covered: 
Chapters 1-10 and 13-16 
30% 
*   Many Lessons cover a single Chapter. However, three Lessons combine selected Learning 
Objectives from two Chapters. The Learning Objectives (L.O.) covered are indicated in the 
Agenda and in the Summary Notes. The three Lessons are: 
• Lesson 5 which covers certain Learning Objectives from Chapters 5 and 6. 
• Lesson 7 which covers certain Learning Objectives from Chapters 8 and 9.   
• Lesson 10 which covers certain Learning Objectives from Chapters 14 and 15.  
 ** Please note that some material from the Lessons is not subject to examination.  The 
Summary Notes clearly indicate, for each Lesson, which material is not subject to 
examination. 
 
 
Description of Graded Assessments 
Online Individual Quizzes 
All quizzes are individual and due by 11:59 PM on the date indicated in the Agenda (“individual” means 
that you, and you alone wrote the solution; please review the Academic Code of Conduct). All online 
quizzes will be composed of 30 multiple choice questions chosen at random from a test bank. Please refer to 
the Outline and Agenda for the chapters to be covered and the Agenda for the quiz dates. For each quiz, 
students will sign onto the website (select the corresponding quiz link under Assessments to access and 
submit your quiz) for a timed 60 minute-period on the date indicated (plus a 5-minute grace period for a total of 
65 minutes). You will be able to start the 65-minute quiz as of 8:00 AM on the date indicated in the 
Agenda, with completion by 11:59 PM sharp on the date indicated in the Agenda. At the deadline, the 
“Attempt quiz now” link is removed. To be clear, you decide when you start the quiz within this period. 
Timing (“count down” clock) for the 65-minute quiz begins as soon as the quiz is started. Additional 
instructions will be given in the Announcements section as the quiz dates approach.  Sample quizzes will be 
made available under Assessments. 
Online Individual Cases 
The Cases are individual and due by 11:59 PM on the date indicated in the Agenda (“individual” means 
that you, and you alone wrote the solution; please review the Academic Code of Conduct). Please refer 
to the Outline and Agenda for the chapters covered and Agenda for the due dates. For the Cases, students 
will sign onto the website (select the corresponding case link under Assessments to access the Word 
document and to submit your cases). If you make an error in your case solution or wish to revise what you 
have submitted, you will be able to edit and resubmit your submission up until the deadline date and time of 
11:59 PM which is when the submission link is removed. The case solution will be posted shortly 
thereafter. Additional instructions will be given in the Announcements section as the Case work approaches. 
Sample cases will be made available under Assessments. 
Online Individual Final Exam 
The online final exam is individual and open-book (“individual” means that you, and you alone wrote 
the solution; please review the Academic Code of Conduct). It will take place online during the exam 
period.  The final exam will consist of multiple-choice questions and is cumulative, i.e. will cover all examinable 
material).  Additional instructions will be given in the Announcements section as the Final Exam 
approaches. A sample final exam will be made available under Assessments. You do not need a 50% grade 
on the final exam to pass the course however an overall grade of 50% is required to pass the course. 
 
EXAMINATION CONFLICTS 
If you have a legitimate final exam conflict, you have two options, but you MUST take the necessary steps 
directly with the Examinations Office within the deadline date for an option below to apply. For more 
information, please visit the following link to work with the Examinations Office regarding potential options 
(https://www.concordia.ca/students/exams/conflicts.html) 
• Write an alternate exam 
• Defer the exam 
ONLINE EXAMS AND INSTRUCTION  
 
This course is taught online, including all assessments. This course does not use an online proctoring tool 
called Proctorio. 
Please note the following with respect to online exams: 
1. That the final exam will take place during the exam period at the designated date and time set by the 
Exams office. All exam times will be set to Eastern Standard/Daylight Time. 
2. That you will be responsible for ensuring appropriate, properly functioning technology (appropriate 
browser and an ability to download any necessary software, as well as a reliable internet connection with 
a minimum of a 3G connection). 
Students who are unable to write an exam because they are unable to meet the above conditions and 
requirements are advised that they will need to drop the course. Students are advised that the drop deadline 
(DNE) for this course is January 29, 2024. 
Students who require additional accommodations for their exams due to a documented disability should 
contact the Access Centre for Students with Disabilities (ACSD) as soon as possible 
(https://www.concordia.ca/students/accessibility.html). 
 Grades 
In order to view your grades throughout the semester, select the Grades link located on the left hand side 
vertical menu on the course page. 
 
It is your responsibility to ensure that your work has been successfully submitted (as per the course outline) 
and to contact your TA via e-mail for clarification if you have any questions concerning your grades. 
 
Your final letter grade for the course will be posted in your Student Hub at the end of the term. 
Grading Distribution 
A+ 90 + 
A 85-89 
A- 80-84 
B+ 77-79 
B 73-76 
B- 70-72 
C+ 67-69 
C 63-66 
C- 60-62 
D+ 57-59        
D 53-56           
D- 50-52 
FNS 49 < 
 
 
Final numerical grades will be rounded as follows:  Grades ending in .1 to .4 will be rounded down.  Grades 
ending in .5 to .9 will be rounded up. 
 
 
 
Policies: 
Late Submissions and Extensions 
• Late submissions will not be accepted. 
• No extensions will be offered on quizzes or the case. The case solution will be posted shortly after the 
submission deadline. 
• If you are unable to complete your work by the deadline or complete an exam on the assigned date, due 
to medical reasons, it is your responsibility to advise your instructor at FINA200@econcordia.com and 
your Teaching Assistant. 
• If you have technical difficulties, please contact at: helpdesk@econcordia.com  
• Please note that you are responsible for the version of the work you upload to the website. If you upload 
the incorrect version of your work to the website, you can resubmit the correct version prior to the 
deadline. If you fail to meet the deadline, the version of your work located on the website is the one that 
will be graded. In addition, please note that it is your responsibility to ensure that your case is received 
before the deadline. Should you be unable to submit your work via the website you must submit your 
work via e-mail to your TA before the deadline. Please give yourself enough time for online submissions 
to send your case via e-mail should a technical issue arise. 
• Responses may be written in French. 
ETHICAL BEHAVIOUR  
• All individuals participating in courses are expected to be professional and constructive throughout the 
course, including in their communications. Concordia students are subject to the Code of Rights and 
Responsibilities which applies both when students are physically and virtually engaged in any University 
activity, including classes, seminars, meetings, etc. Students engaged in university activities must 
respect this Code when engaging with any members of the Concordia community, including faculty, staff, 
and students, whether such interactions are verbal or in writing, face to face or online/virtual. Failing to 
comply with the Code may result in charges and sanctions, as outlined in the Code 6. 
• Plagiarism: The most common offense under the Academic Code of Conduct is plagiarism, which the 
Code defines as “the presentation of the work of another person as one’s own or without proper 
acknowledgement.” This includes material copied word for word from books, journals, Internet sites, 
professor’s course notes, etc. It refers to material that is paraphrased but closely resembles the original 
source. It also includes for example the work of a fellow student, an answer on a quiz, data for a lab 
report, a paper or assignment completed by another student. It might be a paper purchased from any 
source. Plagiarism does not refer to words alone – it can refer to copying images, graphs, tables, and 
ideas. “Presentation” is not limited to written work. It includes oral presentations, computer assignment 
and artistic works. Finally, if you translate the work of another person into any other language and do not 
cite the source, this is also plagiarism. 
 
In Simple Words: Do not copy, paraphrase or translate anything from anywhere without saying where 
you obtained it! (Source: The Academic Integrity Website: concordia.ca/students/academic-integrity) 
 
 
 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (IP)  
 
Content belonging to instructors shared in online courses, including, but not limited to, online lectures, 
course notes, quizzes, cases, final exams and video recordings of classes remain the intellectual property 
of the faculty member. It may not be distributed, published or broadcast, in whole or in part, without the 
express permission of the faculty member. Students are also forbidden to use their own means of 
recording any elements of an online class or lecture without express permission of the instructor.  
 
Any unauthorized sharing of course content may constitute a breach of the Academic Code of Conduct 
and/or the Code of Rights and Responsibilities. As specified in the Policy on Intellectual Property,, the 
University does not claim any ownership of or interest in any student IP. All university members retain 
copyright over their work.  
 
EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCES  
 
In the event of extraordinary circumstances and pursuant to the Academic Regulations, the University may 
modify the delivery, content, structure, forum, location and/or evaluation scheme. In the event of such 
extraordinary circumstances, students will be informed of the changes. 
 
Online Lectures 
The Professor will provide live online lectures to address questions, review certain key areas in the course, as 
well as review sessions for the quizzes, and the final exam.  These lectures will take place through Zoom. [1]. 
This online classroom lets your professor share screens and chat with participants. For those that cannot 
attend, the online live lectures will be recorded and made available to students within 48 hours. 
 
[1] Zoom refers to a video conferencing meeting that's hosted using Zoom. You can join these meetings for 
lectures via internet or phone. Zoom is an online application that conducts a live online conference for multiple 
users. Due to the large class size, you will be asked to turn your camera off. 
 
Improving Students’ Academic Experience 
The course outline provides important factual information, which students need to be able to meet the 
requirements of any course. However, this outline also serves as a reminder to students of all the support 
services that are available to help achieve academic and personal success. 
For students that may experience academic or personal difficulties at any point during their academic career, 
please see the following support services: 
 
 
 
LIST OF STUDENT SERVICES 
1. Access Centre for Students with Disabilities: https://www.concordia.ca/students/accessibility.html  
2. Accessibility Hub: https://www.concordia.ca/accessibility.html 
3. Black Perspectives Office: : https://www.concordia.ca/provost/about/areas/black-perspectives-office.html 
4. Career Management Services: https://www.concordia.ca/jmsb/career.html  
5. Code of Rights and Responsibilities: 
https://www.concordia.ca/content/dam/common/docs/policies/official-policies/BD-3.pdf  
6. Student Success Centre: https://www.concordia.ca/students/success.html  
7. Department’s Academic Advisor: For academic advising, current JMSB students should contact their 
program specific advisor by email. 
8. Counselling and Psychological Services: https://www.concordia.ca/health/mental-health/services.html; 
https://www.concordia.ca/health/mental-health/counselling.html 
9. Concordia Library Citation and Style Guides: https://library.concordia.ca/help/citing 
10. Health Services: https://www.concordia.ca/health.html  
11. Health Services Clinic: https://www.concordia.ca/health/medical/clinic.html  
12. Financial Aid and Awards: https://www.concordia.ca/students/financial.html  
13. Academic Integrity: https://www.concordia.ca/conduct/academic-integrity.html  
14. Dean of Students Office: http://www.concordia.ca/offices/dean-students.html 
15. Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Working Group Final Report: 
https://www.concordia.ca/provost/initiatives/working-toward-equity-diversity-inclusion.html 
16. Equity Office: https://www.concordia.ca/equity.html 
17. International Students Office: https://www.concordia.ca/students/international.html  
18. Student Hub: https://www.concordia.ca/students.html  
19. Student Success Centre: https://www.concordia.ca/students/success.html 
20. Tuition and Financial Aid: https://www.concordia.ca/students/financial.html 
21. Student Housing: https://www.concordia.ca/students/housing.html 
22. Sexual Assault Resource Centre: https://www.concordia.ca/conduct/sexual-assault.html  
23. As a Concordia student, you are a member of the Concordia Student Union and have many resources 
available to you including: HOJO (Off Campus Housing and Job Bank): https://classifieds.csu.qc.ca/en/  
and the CSU Advocacy Centre: https://www.concordia.ca/students/success/advocacy.html  
24. Indigenous Decolonization Hub: https://www.concordia.ca/ctl/decolonization.html 
25. Indigenous Directions Office: https://www.concordia.ca/indigenous.html 
26. Indigenous Directions Action Plan: https://www.concordia.ca/indigenous/action-plan.html 
27. Aboriginal Student Resource Centre: https://www.concordia.ca/students/otsenhakta.html 
28. Mindful campus initiative: https://www.concordia.ca/finearts/student-life/mindful-campus.html 
29. NouLa Black Student Center: https://www.concordia.ca/students/noula.html 
30. Office of Community Engagement: https://www.concordia.ca/about/community/office.html 
31. Ombuds Office: https://www.concordia.ca/offices/ombuds.html 
32. Otsenhákta Student Centre: https://www.concordia.ca/students/otsenhakta.html 
33. Policy On Accessibility And Accommodation For Students And Employees: 
https://www.concordia.ca/content/dam/common/docs/policies/official-policies/PRVPA-14.pdf 
34. President’s Task Force on Anti-Black Racism Final Report: 
https://www.concordia.ca/provost/initiatives/task-force-anti-black-racism.html 
35. Student Advocacy Office: https://www.concordia.ca/students/success/advocacy.html 
36. SHIFT Centre: https://www.concordia.ca/about/shift/contact.html 
 
Important Information 
Topic 
Link 
Academic Integrity 
Academic Integrity 
Educational Technology Guidelines 
Concordia Educational Technology 
Guidelines for Faculty and Students 
(the “Guidelines”) 
Access Centre for Students with Disabilities 
ACSD 
Concordia Library Citation & Style Guides 
How to cite... 
Course Communication Tools 
Communication 
eConcordia Policies 
Policies 
Final Exams Information 
Final Exams 
Helpdesk/Support 
FAQ 
Refunds 
Refunds 
Technical Requirements 
Technical Requirements 
Tips for Studying Online 
Studying Tips 
Tips on how to reach online learning goals (learning modules) 
How to Succeed @ eConcordia 
How to install and use Zoom 
Web Conference with Zoom 
 
Tutorial Companies 
Please note that private tutorial companies, some of whom aggressively promote their services on and off 
campus, are not authorized by Concordia University to distribute flyers on university premises and may not use 
Concordia University facilities to promote or provide their services.  
Concordia University and its academic departments do not have any affiliation with these companies even 
though names such as JMSB, Concordia, or references to specific departments often appear in a visible way. 
If you are interested in the University’s approved tutoring services, consult the services listed in your course 
outline or other services listed on the University’s website. 
 
Pearson MyLab and Mastering 
 
Pearson MyLab and Mastering is available online through your web browser, and the Pearson+ app for eTexts 
is available to download on all popular platforms (iOS, Android, Windows, and Mac OS).  
Pearson MyLab and Mastering Support: 
Should you encounter any problems regarding your MyLab and Mastering account, students are requested to 
access the following website to help troubleshoot. 
https://support.pearson.com/getsupport/s/contactsupport 
Select your Country of Study (Canada), Language, Role (College Student), Issue Category, and the Product 
(MyLab Finance) to access articles that may help resolve your issue.  
You can also chat live with a Pearson representative. The chat feature is available 24/7. 
For additional assistance, select the “Call Us” option, and follow the necessary steps to speak directly to a 
Pearson agent. Phone hours are between 10:00 am to 10:00 pm Monday-Friday, EST.  
 
Texidium 
Texidium is an eReader platform that puts your eTexts at your fingertips on any device, anywhere, and at any 
time. 
Available online and for all popular platforms (iOS, Android, Windows, and Mac OS), Texidium is designed with 
the student learning experience in mind. 
 
Texidium Support Hours: 
• 
Monday to Friday, 6:00 am to 6:00 pm EST. This includes email, phone or chat support. 
• 
Evening and night support is available via email only, from 6:00 pm to midnight. 
• 
The communication channels for End-Users is available at https://texidium.com/contact/. 
• 
Over the weekend, email support is from 8:00 am to midnight; however, it is a reduced team so 
response times may be a bit slower and prioritized by level of urgency. 
 
Third Party Software/Websites 
Here is an excerpt on Concordia's policy on Educational software or services developed and owned by third 
parties, including those linked to textbooks, in-class surveys, lecture capture, virtual classrooms, course 
assignments and quizzes can be invaluable tools for the development and teaching of courses. 
Third-Party software/websites that require personal information (name, email, 
student number, etc.): 
Students are advised that external software and/or websites will be used in the course and students may be 
asked to submit or consent to the submission of personal information (for example, name and email) to register 
for an online service. Students are responsible for reading and deciding whether or not to agree to any 
applicable terms of use. Use of this software and service is voluntary. Students who do not consent to use the 
software or service should identify themselves to the course instructor as soon as possible, and in all cases 
before the DNE deadline, to discuss alternate modes of participation. 
Third-party software/websites for work submission: 
Students are advised that external software and/or websites will be used in the course and students may be 
asked to submit or consent to the submission of their work to an online service. Students are responsible for 
reading and deciding whether or not to agree to any applicable terms of use. Use of this software and service 
is voluntary. Students who do not consent to use the software or service should identify themselves to the 
course instructor as soon as possible to discuss alternate modes of participation that do not require them to 
give copyright or the right to use their work to a third party. 
By using the external software or websites, students agree to provide and share their work and certain 
personal information (where applicable) with the website/software provider. Students are advised that the 
University cannot guarantee the protection of intellectual property rights or personal information provided to 
any website or software company. Intellectual property and personal information held in foreign jurisdictions 
are subject to the laws of such jurisdictions. 
Third-party technology to record a course: 
Note that, as a part of this course, some or all of the lectures and/or other activities in this course may be 
recorded. Recordings will be focused on the instructor and will normally exclude students. It is possible, 
however, that your participation may be recorded. If you wish to ensure that your image is not recorded, speak 
to your instructor as soon as possible. 
Also, please note that you may not share recordings of your classes and that the instructor will only share class 
recordings for the purpose of course delivery and development. Any other sharing may be in violation of the 
law and applicable University policies and may be subject to penalties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FINA 200 - Personal Finance Section EC 
Agenda – Winter 2024 
All deadlines indicated are on the due date listed by 11:59 p.m. unless otherwise indicated. 
 
Week 1: January 15 - January 21 
 
Review the Course Outline and Agenda 
 
Navigate the Course Website 
January 15 
Classes begin, winter term 
January 17 
Orientation Lecture at 7:00 PM EST  
Zoom (Click HERE for Lecture link; password: 700823) 
Week 2: January 22 - January 28 
 
Lesson 1 - Chapter 1: Overview of a Financial Plan 
Week 3: January 29 – February 4 
 
Lesson 2 - Chapter 2: Applying Time Value Concepts 
January 29 
Deadline to add winter-term courses 
January 29 
Deadline for withdrawal with tuition refund (DNE) from winter-term courses 
January 30 
Time Value of Money (TVM) Lecture at 7:00 PM EST  
Zoom (Click HERE for Lecture link; password: 700823) 
Week 4: February 5 - February 11 
 
Lesson 3 - Chapter 3: Planning with Personal Financial Statements 
Week 5: February 12 - February 18 
 
Lesson 4 - Chapter 4: Using Tax Concepts for Planning 
February 13 
Using Tax Concepts for Planning Lecture at 7:00 PM EST 
Zoom (Click HERE for Lecture link; password: 700823) 
Week 6: February 19 - February 25 
 
Lesson 5 - Chapter 5: Banking Services and Managing Your Money (L.O.1 and L.O.3) 
 
Lesson 5 - Chapter 6: Assessing, Managing, and Securing Your Credit (L.O.1 to L.O.4) 
February 21 
QUIZ 1 Tutorial Review Lecture at 7:00 PM EST 
Zoom (Click HERE for Lecture link; password: 700823) 
Mid-Term Break: February 26 – March 3 
February 26 
Start of mid-term break 
February 29 
Deadline to submit required documentation to register with the Access Centre 
for Students with Disabilities and request exam accommodations for the Winter 
2024 final examination period 
March 1 
President’s Holiday – University Closed 
March 3 
End of mid-term break 
Week 7: March 4 – March 10 
 
Lesson 6 - Chapter 7: Purchasing and Financing a Home 
March 5 
QUIZ 1 (Chapters 1-6) available to start as of 8:00 AM EST  
(1-hour duration) 
March 7 
QUIZ 1 (Chapters 1-6) to be completed by 11:59 PM EST 
Week 8: March 11 - March 17 
 
Lesson 7 - Chapter 8: Auto and Homeowner’s Insurance (L.O.2 to L.O.3) 
 
Lesson 7 - Chapter 9: Health and Life Insurance (L.O.3, L.O.6 and L.O.8) 
March 11 
CASE 1 (Chapters 1-7) available to start as of 8:00 AM EST  
(1 week to complete) 
Week 9: March 18 - March 24 
 
Lesson 8 - Chapter 10: Investing Fundamentals 
March 18 
CASE 1 (Chapters 1-7) to be completed by 11:59 PM EST 
March 19 
Investment Lecture at 7:00 PM EST 
Zoom (Click HERE for Lecture link; password: 700823) 
Week 10: March 25 - March 31 
 
Lesson 9 - Chapter 13: Investing in Mutual Funds 
March 26 
Quiz 2 Tutorial Review Lecture at 7:00 PM EST 
Zoom (Click HERE for Lecture link; password: 700823) 
March 29 
University Closed 
March 30 
University Closed 
March 31 
University Closed 
Week 11: April 1 - April 7 
April 1 
University Closed 
 
Lesson 10 - Chapter 14: Retirement Savings Planning (L.O.1 - L.O.4) 
 
Lesson 10 - Chapter 15: Retirement Income Planning (L.O.3) 
April 2 
QUIZ 2 (CHAPTERS 7-10, 13) available to start as of 8:00 AM EST  
(1-hour duration) 
April 4 
QUIZ 2 (Chapters 7-10, 13) to be completed by 11:59 PM EST 
Week 12: April 8 - April 14 
 
Lesson 11 - Chapter 16: Estate Planning 
April 8 
CASE 2 (Chapters 8-10, 13-16) available to start as of 8:00 AM EST  
(1-week to complete) 
April 8 
Last day for instructor-scheduled tests or examinations 
April 11 
Final Exam Tutorial Review Lecture at 7:00 PM EST 
Zoom (Click HERE for Lecture link; password: 700823) 
Week 13: April 15 - April 17 
 
Review course material 
April 15 
CASE 2 (CHAPTERS 8-10, 13-16) to be completed by 11:59 PM EST 
April 15 
Last day of classes 
April 17 
Deadline for academic withdrawal (DISC) from winter-term courses 
Examinations Period: April 18 - May 1 
 
Final Exam date and time is posted on your Student Hub 
 
