COURSE SYLLABUS 
 
Course Title: Principles of Finance 
Date submitted: 
 
Spring 2014 
(AAC: 14-26) 
Department: Business & Technology 
Curriculum: Business Administration 
Course 
Descriptors: 
Make certain that the 
course descriptors 
are consistent with 
college and Board of 
Trustees policies, and 
the current course 
numbering system. 
 
Course Code: (eg. ACC 101) 
BFN*201 
 
Prerequisites: 
Course Type: 
L 
C- or better in Principles of Financial 
Accounting (ACC*113 C- or better in Integrated 
Reading and Writing II (ENG*075) OR 
Introduction to College Reading & Writing 
(ENG*093) OR Introduction to College English 
(ENG*096) OR Reading & Writing VI 
(ESL*162), or placement into Composition 
(ENG*101) [including embedded ENG*101] 
OR permission of Department Chair 
A: Clinical    B: Lab    D: Distance Learning  
I: Individual/Independent    L: Lecture    M: Seminar  N: Internship    
P: Practicum    U: Studio  X: Combined Lecture/Lab    
Y: Combined Lecture/ Clinical/Lab    Z: Combined Lecture/Studio 
Elective Type: 
G 
AH: Art History   E: English   FA: Fine Arts   FL: Foreign Language     
G: General   HI: History   HU: Humanities   LAS: Liberal Arts & 
Sciences   M: Math  S: Science   SS: Social Science     
 Credit Hours: 
3 
Co-requisites: 
 Developmental: (yes/no) 
N 
Intermediate Algebra (MAT*137), or placement 
into higher mathematics, OR permission of 
Department Chair 
 Contact 
Hours:  
Lecture: 
3 
Clinical: 
0 
Lab: 
0 
Studio 
0 
Other: 
0 
TOTAL: 
3 
Other Requirements: 
Class Maximum: 
35 
None 
Semesters Offered: 
F & S 
 
 
Catalog 
Course 
Description: 
An introduction to the principles of financial management and the impact of the financial markets 
and institutions on that managerial function.  Major topics include the environment of financial 
management, evaluation of a firm’s financial performance, financial forecasting, working capital 
management, corporate securities and financing the short- and long-term requirements of the firm, 
time value of money, capital and cash budgeting, the relationship of risk to return, cost of capital, 
leverage, and evaluation of alternative methods of financing.  An analytical emphasis will be placed 
on the tools and techniques of the investment, financing, and dividend decision.   
Topical 
Outline:  
 List course content in 
outline format. 
Part I. Introduction: The Scope and Environment of Financial Management 
1.       Introduction:  goal of the firm; legal forms of business organization; taxation; ten principles of   
financial management 
2.       The financial markets and interest rates 
3.       Understanding financial statements and cash flows 
4.       Evaluating a firm’s financial performance:  financial ratio analysis; firm performance and 
shareholder value 
Part II. Valuation of Financial Assets 
5.       The time value of money:  compound interest; present value and future value;   annuities 
6.       Risk and return 
7.       Valuation and characteristics of bonds 
8.       Valuation and characteristics of stock 
Part III. Investment in Long-Term Assets 
9.       Capital-budgeting techniques and practice:  capital-budgeting decision criteria (Payback, 
NPV, PI, and IRR); capital rationing; ethics in capital budgeting 
Principles of Finance                                      COURSE SYLLABUS — page  
 
 
2
10.     Cash flows 
11. Cost of capital:  individual costs of capital; weighted average cost of capital; evaluating new 
capital investments; shareholder value-based management 
Part IV: Capital structure and dividend policy 
12. Determining the financing mix:  business and financial risk; break-even analysis; operating 
leverage; financial leverage 
13.   Dividend policy and internal financing 
Part V: Working Capital Management 
14. Short-term financial planning:  financial forecasting; percent of sales forecast method; the 
cash budget 
15.   Working-Capital management:  managing current assets and liabilities; appropriate level of 
working capital; short-term credit 
Outcomes: 
Describe measurable 
skills or knowledge 
that students should 
be able to 
demonstrate as 
evidence that they 
have mastered the 
course content.   
Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able to do the following: 
COURSE:  
1. 
demonstrate a conceptual understanding of corporate financial decision-making processes, 
including capital budgeting 
2. 
calculate a comprehensive set of financial ratios and use them to evaluate the financial health 
of a company 
3. 
explain the time value of money 
4. 
understanding the role of risk and how to calculate return in all types of assets, including 
stocks and bonds 
5. 
apply critical thinking skills to attempt to apply lessons learned to financial situations that will 
be encountered 
PROGRAM: (Numbering reflects Program Outcomes as they appear in the college catalog) 
Business Administration Program 
1. successfully complete the business administration core courses and demonstrate competencies 
necessary for success in business administration including an understanding of: 
 
a) 
the role of accounting and finance in the management of a business enterprise     
 
2. demonstrate the ability to integrate knowledge and apply learned skills for real-world business 
decision making 
 
3. demonstrate proficiency in the General Education Abilities as they apply to the business 
professions  
 
Finance Option   
1. demonstrate competency in investment and financing decisions 
 
2. demonstrate specialized knowledge necessary for success in finance including understanding of 
the American and global monetary and financial system, financial instruments, markets and 
institutions 
GENERAL EDUCATION: (Numbering reflects General Education Outcomes as they appear in the college catalog) 
2.   Critical Analysis/ Logical Thinking - Students will be able to organize, interpret, and evaluate evidence   
      and ideas within and across disciplines; draw reasoned inferences and defensible conclusions; and   
      solve problems and make decisions based on analytical processes. 
 
Demonstrates:  Identifies the issue(s); formulates an argument; explains and analyzes relationships clearly; 
draws reasonable inferences and conclusions that are logical and defensible; provides support by evaluating 
credible sources of evidence necessary to justify conclusions. 
Does Not Demonstrate:  Identifies few or no issues; formulates an argument without significant focus; provides 
an unclear explanation of analysis and relationships; drawing few reasonable inferences and conclusions that are 
illogical and indefensible; provides little to no support using credible sources of evidence necessary to justify 
conclusions. 
 
Evaluation: 
List how the above 
outcomes will be 
assessed. 
Assessment will be based on the following criteria: 
examinations 
papers 
Principles of Finance                                      COURSE SYLLABUS — page  
 
 
3
quizzes 
oral presentations 
group projects  
Instructional 
Resources: 
. 
Required: None 
Desired:  None  
Textbook(s) Refer to current academic year printout 
 
