 
Course Number 
MGMT 2320 
Course Ttitle 
MANAGERIAL FINANCE 
List of topics covered An undergraduate level introduction to corporate financial 
analysis and decision making.  
This course covers the following topics: financial statement 
analysis, valuation principles, risk and return analysis, 
working capital management, capital budgeting, cost of 
capital, capital structure, and dividend policy. 
 
COURSE GOALS/OBJECTIVES: 
1. Develop an understanding of basic financial topics such 
as risk versus return, the time value of money, the valuation 
and pricing of financial assets, and the benefits of 
diversification.  
2. Ability to apply the above techniques to carry out capital 
budgeting tasks.  
3. Understanding of basic financial securities including 
equities, debt instruments, and derivatives.  
4. Ability to value securities using basic concepts such as 
risk versus return, diversification, and market efficiency, 
and the time value of money. 
Textbooks 
(Include author name 
and edition) 
1. Berk, Jonathan and Peter DeMarzo (2014): Corporate 
Finance, 4th Edition. Pearson (Boston, MA). ISBN-13: 
978-0134083278, ISBN-10: 013408327X.  
2. Any other material will be distributed by the instructor. 
Grading scheme 
Homework: 10%  
In-class labs: 25%  
Exam 1: 20%  
Exam 2: 20%  
Project: 25% 
 
Syllabus 
1 of 7     
   Summer 2021 
 
 
SYLLABUS 
Managerial Finance Summer ARCH Version 
MGMT 2320 (CRN 16510) 
Credit Hours 4 
Summer ARCH 2021 
Room Location: TBA (Monday, Thursday 1:00pm – 3:05pm) 
Course website: lms.rpi.edu   
 
Prerequisites or Other Requirements: MGMT 2300: Fundamentals of Accounting for 
Decision Making. 
 
INSTRUCTOR 
 
Instructor Name: Brian Clark 
 
 
 
Office Location: Pitts 1110 
 
Tel. No.: 518-276-4467 (email preferred) 
 
           Email Address: clarkb2@rpi.edu 
Office Hours: All office hours will be held virtually via WebEx by appointment. 
 
In case of another email or server outage or to contact me after normal work hours, I can 
be reached at clarkb2rpi@gmail.com.  
 
COURSE DESCRIPTION:  
 
An undergraduate level introduction to corporate financial analysis and decision making. 
This course covers the following topics: financial statement analysis, valuation principles, 
risk and return analysis, working capital management, capital budgeting, cost of capital, 
capital structure, and dividend policy. 
 
REQUIRED TEXT(S):  
1. Berk, Jonathan and Peter DeMarzo (2014): Corporate Finance, 4th Edition.  
Pearson (Boston, MA).  ISBN-13: 978-0134083278, ISBN-10: 013408327X. 
2. Any other material will be distributed by the instructor. 
COURSE GOALS/OBJECTIVES (OPTIONAL) 
1. Students should develop an understanding of basic financial topics such as risk 
versus return, the time value of money, the valuation and pricing of financial 
assets, and the benefits of diversification. 
 
Syllabus 
2 of 7     
   Summer 2021 
 
2. Ability to apply the above techniques to carry out capital budgeting tasks. 
 
3. Understanding of basic financial securities including equities, debt instruments, 
and derivatives. 
 
4. Ability to value securities using basic concepts such as risk versus return, 
diversification, and market efficiency, and the time value of money. 
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES 
1. Financial Skills: Students should be able to conceptualize and apply key 
financial theories to assess corporate financial decisions.  
 
2. Financial Skills: Students should be able to value securities using basic financial 
ratios and data. 
 
3. Financial Skills: Students should be able to carry out discounted cash flow 
analysis for decision making. 
 
COURSE ASSESSMENT MEASURES  
The grade for the course will be based on performance exams, case studies, homework 
assignments, and class participation.   
 
Homework: 
Assigned during lectures – reading, research, and 
problems.  Homework assignments must be done 
individually, unless explicitly stated otherwise (by the 
instructor).  Discussions with classmates and the instructor 
and strongly encouraged, but eventual implementation, 
analysis, and writing must be individual work.  Homework is 
due at the start of the lecture the day it is due.  Homework 
will be graded on a scale of 0-3.  No late homework will be 
accepted without prior approval from the instructor.   
In-Class Labs 
In-class labs will be assigned throughout the semester.  
These assignments are typically more involved than regular 
HW assignments.  As with HW assignments, discussions 
with classmates and the instructor and strongly encouraged, 
but eventual implementation, analysis, and writing must be 
individual work.  Solutions will be submitted online via LMS.
 
REMOTE ASYNCHONOUS STUDENTS: Students taking 
the course remotely and asynchronously will have 24 
hours from the end of the live lecture to complete the 
in-class labs.  It is your responsibility to view the lecture 
and complete any in-class labs as the assignments will 
often be announced in class.
 
Syllabus 
3 of 7     
   Summer 2021 
Exams: 
There are two exams for the course.  The first exam will be 
administered prior to add/drop deadline and the second 
exam will be administered at the end of the semester.  The 
exams will be open book and submitted online via LMS.
Project: 
There will be a group project assigned during the semester 
that will be due during finals week.  Specific details 
regarding the project will be announced in class.  The major 
components of the project grade will be 1) a presentation 
and 2) the final deliverable (e.g., a report, app, etc.).
 
Class Participation: 
 
Class participation is a necessary and integral part of 
learning and as such is required.  However, due to the 
unique situation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, some 
students will attend in person and others will attend virtually.  
Students should make every reasonable effort to attend 
classes synchronously (i.e., view lectures live).  
 
 
 
GRADING CRITERIA  
Grading Scheme: 
Homework: 10% 
In-class labs: 25% 
Exam 1: 20% 
Exam 2: 20% 
Project: 25% 
 
Letter Grades*: 
Minimum
Maximum
Letter Grade
92
100
A
90
91
A-
87
89
B+
83
86
B
80
82
B-
77
79
C+
73
76
C
70
72
C-
67
69
D+
60
66
D
0
59
F
 
 
Syllabus 
4 of 7     
   Summer 2021 
*Letter grade breakpoints may be adjusted slightly based on the mean or median 
of the overall class score. 
 
 
ATTENDANCE POLICY  
 
Class attendance is an integral part of learning.  However, due to the unique situation 
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, some students will attend in person and others will 
attend virtually.  Students should make every reasonable effort to attend classes 
synchronously (i.e., view lectures live).   
 
Remote asynchronous students are required to view the recorded lectures and 
submit any in-class assignments within 24 hours of the live lecture. 
OTHER COURSE POLICIES (OPTIONAL) 
 
Class Participation:  
 
The course is a coproduction of your and my efforts - this means you are a producer 
as much as a consumer of the course.  You are required to ask questions, respond to my 
questions, advance the class discussions, and to make comments based on your 
personal background.  There will be frequent classroom activities and your classroom 
behavior will be counted toward an overall participation score.  I will do my best to include 
and engage distance learning students in the discussions. 
 
Improper behavior or computer/phone/tablet usage will not be tolerated in this 
course.  Improper behavior, such as coming late, leaving early, sleeping in class, or 
inappropriate computer/phone/tablet usage will adversely affect your participation score.  
The same general principals apply to distance learning students. 
 
ADA Compliance: 
Any student with a disability that needs course or examination accommodations should 
request as soon as possible for such accommodations through the Disabled Student 
Services in the Dean of Students Office.  Please do this as soon as possible and 
provide a copy of your approved accommodation form to me.   
 
Re-Grade Policy: 
If you believe and error has been made in grading your homework or exam, you may 
request a re-grade by doing the following: Write a brief note to me explaining why 
you think there is an error and submit both the note and the entire assignment or 
exam to which it pertains.  All re-grade requests must occur within seven (7) calendar 
days of the day graded material is returned to the class.  I reserve the right to re-grade 
the entire contents of any submitted assignment or exam. 
 
 
Syllabus 
5 of 7     
   Summer 2021 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY  
 
Student-teacher relationships are built on trust. For example, students must trust that 
teachers have made appropriate decisions about the structure and content of the courses 
they teach, and teachers must trust that the assignments that students turn in are their own. 
Acts that violate this trust undermine the educational process. 
The Rensselaer Handbook of Student Rights and Responsibilities and the Graduate Student 
Supplement (For 6000 level and above courses) define various forms of Academic 
Dishonesty and you should make yourself familiar with these. In this class, all assignments 
that are turned in for a grade must represent the student’s own work. In cases where help 
was received, or teamwork was allowed, a notation on the assignment should indicate your 
collaboration. Submission of any assignment that is in violation of this policy will result in (1) 
an academic (grade) penalty and (2) reporting to Lally’s Associate Dean of Academic Affairs 
and either the Dean of Students (for Undergraduates) or the Dean of Graduate Education 
(for Graduate students).  
In this course, the academic penalty for a first offense is a zero on the homework, lab, 
project, or exam.  A second offense will result in failure of the course as noted in 
Lally’s Three Strikes Policy.  
If you have any questions concerning this policy before submitting an assignment or taking 
an exam, please ask for clarification. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATIONS  
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute strives to make all learning experiences as accessible as 
possible. If you anticipate or experience academic barriers based on a disability, please let 
me know immediately so that we can discuss your options.   
To establish reasonable accommodations, please register with The Office of Disability 
Services for Students (mailto:dss@rpi.edu; 518-276-8197; 4226 Academy Hall).  After 
registration, make arrangements with me as soon as possible to discuss your 
accommodations so that they may be implemented in a timely fashion.” 
 
COURSE CALENDAR1 
 
 
Date 
NOTES 
Topic 
Suggested 
Readings (Berk 
& DeMarzo)
May 24 
 
Introduction to the course. 
N/A 
May 27 
 
Financial Statement Analysis (accounting review)  
1-2 
June 2 
Class on Wed., 
June 2 
Time Value of Money (1) 
3-4 
                                                 
1 The course calendar is subject to change at the instructor’s discretion. 
 
Syllabus 
6 of 7     
   Summer 2021 
June 3 
 
Time Value of Money (2) and In-class lab (TVM) 
3-4 
June 7 
 
Interest Rates (1) 
5 
June 10 
 
Interest Rates (2) and in-class lab (personal loans – 
mortgages, credit cards, student loans) 
5 
June 14 
 
Valuing Bonds 
6 
June 17 
 
Valuing Projects and Firms and in-class lab (NPV Rules) 
7 
June 21 
 
Valuing Projects and Firms  
7 
June 24 
EXAM 1 – No Class
Exam 1 – Take home exam. 
N/A 
June 28 
 
Fundamentals of Capital Budgeting (1) 
8 
July 1 
 
Fundamentals of Capital Budgeting (2) and in-class lab 
(DCF analysis) 
8 
July 5 
NO CLASS  
SEMESTER BREAK 
 
July 8 
NO CLASS  
SEMESTER BREAK 
 
July 12 
 
Valuing Stocks (1)  
9 
July 15 
VIRTUAL CLASS 
Valuing Stocks (2) and in-class lab (equity valuation) 
9 
July 19 
 
Risk and Return (1) – and in-class lab (market risk 
premium) 
10-11 
July 22 
 
Optimal Portfolio Choice and the CAPM (1) 
10-11 
July 26 
 
Optimal Portfolio Choice and the CAPM (2) and in-class 
lab (CAPM) 
10-11 
July 29 
 
Estimating the Cost of Capital (2) and in-class lab 
(WACC) 
12 
August 2 
 
Capital Structure (1) 
14-15 
August 5 
 
Capital Structure (2) – Debt and Taxes and in-class lab 
14-15 
August 9 
EXAM 2 – No Class
Exam 2 – Take home exam. 
N/A 
August 12 
Project 
Presentations 
 
N/A 
August 16 
Project 
Presentations 
 
N/A 
August 19 
LAST DAY OF 
CLASSES 
Final Project Deliverables Due 
N/A 
 
Syllabus 
7 of 7     
   Summer 2021 
COVID-19 Syllabus Guidelines – Lally School of Management 
  
Students taking Lally School of Management classes are required to abide by the COVID-
19 code of conduct below. This code will apply to any class that meets fully or partially 
in an on-campus physical classroom for in-person instruction. 
 
Violations: Refusal to comply with the COVID-19 code of conduct will be treated just as 
any classroom disruption, which will receive request for immediate compliance, failing 
which the student will be asked to leave the classroom. Any further noncompliance will 
result in the dismissal of the entire class. All Covid-19 related violations will be reported 
by the instructor to the Compliance Officer at Lally School, and the Dean of Students. A 
student found to be in violation of the code, or required repeated reminders for 
compliance, will be asked to participate in all classes remotely. This is to protect their 
health and safety as well as the health and safety of their classmates, instructor, and the 
university community. 
 
Masks: All students must wear a mask in classrooms and all public places including 
anywhere inside Pittsburgh building. Masks will be provided to the student by the 
Institute. 
 
Traffic Flow and Social Distancing: Students and faculty will respect the need for 
social distancing. They are required to follow the traffic flow arrows posted in all rooms 
and buildings, including bathrooms and common areas.  
 
In-Class Seating: Students should sit in the appropriate designated seating in the 
classroom. Students are not allowed to move furniture or sit in seats not designated by 
the Institute.  
 
Cleaning of Spaces: Students are encouraged to clean the surfaces of the 
chairs/tables/desks they occupy before they sit down and as they prepare to leave. 
Cleaning and sanitizing solutions will be provided the classroom. 
  
Students who are ill, under quarantine for COVID-19, or suspect they are ill 
should not come to class. All faculty will make every reasonable effort to accommodate 
the student’s absence and will communicate that accommodation directly to the student. 
Students who need to report an illness should contact the Student Health 
Center via email or call 518-276-6287. For student seen off campus, a student may 
request an excused absence via www.bit.ly/rpiabsence with an uploaded doctor’s note 
that excuses them. 
 
 
 
