Course Outline 
Course Code 
RSM 329 H1 S 
Course Name 
Accounting for Finance Professionals 
Term, Year 
Winter, 2023 
Course Meets 
L0101: Mondays 11am-1pm in WO30 
L0201: Mondays 1pm-3pm in WO30 
L5101: Mondays 5pm-7pm in WO30 
Web page URL 
https://q.utoronto.ca 
Instructor Details 
Name 
Email 
Phone 
Office 
Hours 
Virtual 
Office 
Link 
Dragan 
Stojanovic 
dragan.stojanovic@rotman.utoronto.ca  416-978-6819 
TBA 
TBA 
Course Scope, Mission and Learning Outcomes 
Finance professionals often rely on accounting information obtained from financial statements. 
After all, understanding financial statements is crucial for evaluating and forecasting financial 
performance of any organization. Finance professionals use this information to make capital 
allocation decisions: whether to invest/lend and at what price/terms.  
 
This course builds on the basic foundations provided in RSM219H1 – Introduction to Financial 
Accounting. It is an intermediate-level course that will help you competently read, analyze, 
interpret, and evaluate financial statement information. We will “learn by doing” – analyzing the 
financial statements of some of the most important companies in the world.  
 
We take a global perspective and focus on both International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS) and Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States (US GAAP). By the 
end of the course, you will:  
• 
understand the role of financial reporting and its relationship to finance, economics, 
strategy, marketing, and other business disciplines; 
• 
be able to apply fundamental concepts and principles of financial reporting to analyze 
and interpret complex business transactions, events, and decisions; 
• 
be able to interpret, analyze, and evaluate complex financial statements, including 
specific financial reporting issues relating to investments, revenues, operating assets, 
liabilities, and taxes; and  
• 
be able to use the financial statement analysis toolkit to anticipate adjustments that are 
relevant to the process of forecasting and valuation.  
 
The Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) Program curriculum also assigns a very significant 
weighing to the topics covered in this course: 13-17% at the Level I exam (and 10-15% at Level 
II, which includes additional topics). Students pursuing the CFA designation found this course 
critical preparation for the financial statement analysis portion of the CFA exams. 
Course Prerequisites 
Course Prerequisite: RSM219H1 
Exclusion: RSM212H1 (If taken Winter 2018, 2019) 
 
 
2
Course Materials 
Required Readings  
 Thomas R. Robinson, et al. (2020). International Financial Statement 
Analysis, Fourth Edition (CFA Institute Investment Series). John 
Wiley & Sons, 2020. NOTE: electronic access information will be 
provided on Quercus 
 
Electronic Course Materials 
This course will be using the following electronic course materials: 
 Wiley content for University of Toronto - Accounting for Financial Professionals - Spring 
'23 (purchase instructions will be provided on Quercus) 
 
These materials will cost a total of USD $40.00. The use of these materials complies with all 
University of Toronto policies which govern fees for course materials. 
Evaluation and Grades 
Grades are a measure of the knowledge and skills developed by a student within individual 
courses. Each student will receive a grade on the basis of how well they have command of the 
course materials, skills and learning objectives of the course. 
Work 
Percentage 
of grade 
Due Date 
Personal introduction assignment 
2% 
January 17 
Group contract and team skills audit (GROUP) 
2% 
 
Weekly quizzes 
16% 
Ongoing (best 8) 
Analyst report 1 (GROUP) 
20% 
February 28 
Analyst report 2 (INDIVIDUAL) 
25% 
March 28 
Final exam 
35% 
During UofT final assessment 
period (TBA) 
Course Format and Expectations 
Detailed information for all assignments and deliverables is available on Quercus. 
 
Writing Assignments or Presentations 
All assignments are intended to help you develop your communication skills. How well you 
communicate your ideas, in writing or orally, will be considered in the evaluation of the 
assignment. In your written assignments, you should aim for clarity, strong organization, 
concision, professionalism, and correct grammar. Your presentations should reflect strong 
planning and organization, clarity of speech, and an engaging demeanour. Sources, whether in 
written or presentation assignments, should always be correctly attributed.     
Support is available through the RC Centre for Professional Skills (CPS) for students who would 
like help or feedback on their writing or speaking (presentations). CPS offers both individual and 
group appointments with trained writing instructors and presentation coaches who are familiar 
with the RC program and common types of business assignments. You can also access your 
college Writing Centres for help with written assignments.  
 
 
3
You can book an appointment with a writing or presentation coach through the RC Centre for 
Professional Skills Writing Centre. For more information about writing centres, student supports, 
and study resources, see the Writing and Presentation Coaching academic support page.  
Missed Tests and Assignments (including mid-term and final-term 
assessments)   
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. illness) 
may request special consideration.   
In such cases, students must:  
1. Notify the instructor AND the Rotman Commerce Program Office on the date of the 
missed course deliverable, e.g. missed test, final assessments, assignment or class (in 
the case of participation marks). 
2. Complete a Request for Special Consideration Form and submit it along with your 
Absence Declaration on ACORN (please read the instructions on how to use the 
Absence Declaration in ACORN) within 2 business days of the originally scheduled 
course deliverable.   
Students who do not provide this information will be given a grade of 0 (zero) for the missed 
course deliverable.  
Missed weekly quiz marks will be allocated to remaining quizzes. Missed Midterm Exam 
marks will be allocated to the Final Assessment. In the event of a missed Final Assessment, an 
alternative deliverable will be assigned at the discretion of the instructor.  
Late Assignments 
Late assignments will not be accepted and will receive a mark of zero as all assignments will be 
debriefed immediately after their deadline. 
Students who, for reasons beyond their control, are unable to submit an assignment by its 
deadline must obtain approval from the instructor for an extension or an alternative assignment 
(at the discretion of the instructor). Supporting documentation will be required as per the policy 
on missed tests and assignments.  
Statement on Equity, Diversity and Inclusion 
The University of Toronto is committed to equity, human rights and respect for diversity. All 
members of the learning environment in this course should strive to create an atmosphere of 
mutual respect where all members of our community can express themselves, engage 
with each other, and respect one another’s differences. U of T does not condone discrimination 
or harassment against any persons or communities.  
Commitment to Accessibility 
The University is committed to inclusivity and accessibility, and strives to provide support for, 
and facilitate the accommodation of, individuals with disabilities so that all may share the same 
level of access to opportunities and activities offered at the University. 
If you require accommodations for a temporary or ongoing disability or health concern, or have 
any accessibility concerns about the course, the classroom or course materials, please email 
Accessibility Services or visit the Accessibility Services website for more information as soon as 
possible. Obtaining your accommodation letter may take up to several weeks, so get in touch 
with them as soon as possible. If you have general questions or concerns about the accessibility 
of this course, you are encouraged to reach out to your instructor, course coordinator, or 
Accessibility Services. 
 
 
 
 
4
Ouriginal 
Normally, students will be required to submit their course essays to the University’s plagiarism 
detection tool for a review of textual similarity and detection of possible plagiarism. In doing so, 
students will allow their essays to be included as source documents in the tool’s reference 
database, where they will be used solely for the purpose of detecting plagiarism. The terms that 
apply to the University’s use of this tool are described on the University's Plagiarism Detection 
Tool FAQ page from Centre for Teaching Support & Innovation. 
Academic Integrity 
Academic Integrity is a fundamental value essential to the pursuit of learning and scholarship at 
the University of Toronto. Participating honestly, respectfully, responsibly, and fairly in this 
academic community ensures that the U of T degree that you earn will continue to be valued 
and respected as a true signifier of a student's individual work and academic achievement. As a 
result, the University treats cases of academic misconduct very seriously. 
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters outlines the behaviours 
that constitute academic misconduct, the process for addressing academic offences and the 
penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with the contents of this 
document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to: 
In papers and assignments 
• 
Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement. 
• 
Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the 
instructor. 
• 
Making up sources or facts. 
• 
Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes 
collaborating with others on assignments that are supposed to be completed 
individually). 
On test and exams 
• 
Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone. 
• 
Looking at someone else's answers. 
• 
Misrepresenting your identity. 
• 
Submitting an altered test for re-grading. 
Misrepresentation 
• 
Falsifying institutional documents or grades. 
• 
Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but not 
limited to) medical notes. 
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated by the procedures outlined in 
the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have any question about what is or is not 
permitted in the course, please do not hesitate to contact the course instructor. If you have any 
questions about appropriate research and citation methods, you are expected to seek out 
additional information from the instructor or other U of T or RC resources such as the RC Centre 
for Professional Skills, the College Writing Centres or the Academic Success Centre. 
 
 
5
Email 
At times, the course instructor may decide to communicate important course information by 
email. As such, all U of T students are required to have a valid UTmail+ email address. You are 
responsible for ensuring that your UTmail+ email address is set up and properly entered on 
ACORN. For more information visit the Information Commons Help Desk.  
Forwarding your utoronto.ca email to a Gmail or other type of email account is not advisable. In 
some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to Gmail accounts are filtered as junk 
mail, which means that important messages from your course instructor may end up in your 
spam or junk mail folder. 
Recording Lectures  
Lectures and course materials prepared by the instructor are considered by the University to be 
an instructor’s intellectual property covered by the Canadian Copyright Act. Students wishing to 
record a lecture or other course material in any way are required to ask the instructor’s explicit 
permission, and may not do so unless permission is granted. Students who have been 
previously granted permission to record lectures as an accommodation for a disability are 
excepted. This includes tape recording, filming, photographing PowerPoint slides, Quercus 
materials, etc. 
If permission for recording is granted by the instructor (or via Accessibility Services), it is 
intended for the individual student’s own study purposes and does not include permission to 
“publish” them in any way. It is forbidden for a student to publish an instructor’s notes to a 
website or sell them in any other form without formal permission. 
 
Weekly Schedule 
 
# 
WEEK 
TOPIC & READINGS (required chapter sections are posted on Quercus) 
1 
Jan. 9 
 
Financial analysis techniques (Ch. 6) 
Financial analysis process, analytical tools and techniques, common ratios, equity analysis, credit 
analysis, segment analysis, model building and forecasting 
 
2 
Jan. 16 
 
Financial reporting quality (Ch. 11) & group project kick-off 
Context for assessing financial reporting quality, detection of financial reporting quality issues 
 
PERSONAL INTRODUCTION (2%): due Tuesday, January 17th  
3 
Jan. 23 
 
Understanding income statements (Ch. 3)  
Revenue recognition, non-recuring items and non-operating items (discontinued operations, unusual or 
infrequent items, changes in accounting policies, non-operating items), earnings per share 
(simple/complex capital structures, basic EPS, diluted EPS), comprehensive income 
 
GROUP CONTRACT AND TEAM SKILLS AUDIT (2%): due Tuesday, January 24th  
4 
Jan. 30 
 
Basic intercorporate investments (Ch. 13) 
Basic corporate investment categories, investments in financial assets, basics of investments in 
associates and JVs, basics of business combinations and consolidation 
 
5 
Feb. 6 
 
Understanding cash flow statements (Ch. 5) 
Components and format, linkages and preparation, cash flow statement analysis including free cash flow 
to the firm and free cash flow to equity 
 
6 
Feb. 13 
 
Mid-course review and group project work 
 
Reading Week (NO CLASSES February 20 to February 24) 
7 
Feb. 27 
 
Inventories (Ch. 7)  
Inventory valuation methods with the focus on the LIFO method (LIFO reserve) and adjustments 
 
ANALYST REPORT 1 (GROUP, 20%): due Tuesday, February 28th  
8 
Mar. 6 
 
Long-lived assets – Part 1 (Ch. 8) 
Acquisition (focus on intangible assets, capitalization of interest costs, capitalization of internal 
development costs), depreciation and amortization 
 
9 
Mar. 13 
 
Long-lived assets – Part 2 (Ch. 8) 
Revaluation model, impairments, derecognition, investment properties 
 
10 
Mar. 20 
 
Non-current (long-term) liabilities (Ch. 10) 
Bonds and leases  
 
11 
Mar. 27 
 
Income taxes (Ch. 9) 
Accounting profits vs. taxable income, temporary and permanent differences 
 
ANALYST REPORT 2 (INDIVIDUAL, 25%): due Tuesday, March 28th  
12 
April 3 
Selected topics and course wrap-up 
FINAL EXAM (35%): during University Final Assessment period (April 11 - 28, 2023) 
 
 
2
Please note that the last day you can drop this course without academic penalty is March 
19, 2023.  
 
Other Useful Links 
• Become a volunteer note taker  
• 
Accessibility Services Note Taking Support 
• 
Credit / No-Credit in RSM courses 
• 
Rotman Commerce Academic Support 
URL links for print 
• 
Book an appointment with a writing or presentation coach: http://uoft.me/writingcentres 
• 
Writing and Presentation Coaching academic support page: 
https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-students/academic-support/writing-and-
presentation-coaching/  
• 
Centre for Professional Skills Teamwork Resources page: 
https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/teamwork-resources  
• 
Book an appointment with a Teamwork Mentor: http://uoft.me/writingcentres  
• Request for Special Consideration Form: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-
students/forms-requests-and-appeals/forms/  
• 
 ACORN: http://www.acorn.utoronto.ca/  
• 
Email Accessibility Services: accessibility.services@utoronto.ca  
• 
Accessibility Services website: http://studentlife.utoronto.ca/as   
• 
University's Plagiarism Detection Tool FAQ: https://uoft.me/pdt-faq  
• The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters: 
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm  
• Information Commons Help Desk: http://help.ic.utoronto.ca/category/3/utmail.html  
• 
Become a volunteer note taker: https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/program/volunteer-note-
taking/  
• 
Accessibility Services Note Taking Support: https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/service/note-
taking-support/  
• 
Credit / No-Credit in RSM courses: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-
students/degree-requirements/credit-no-credit-option/  
• 
Rotman Commerce Academic Support: https://rotmancommerce.utoronto.ca/current-
students/academic-support/  
 
