Lesson 1:  
Today’s choices are tomorrow’s payments.
Every day you make choices that will affect your future financial 
position. Some are small, simple choices, such as whether to take 
a lunch from home or buy pizza at school. Even small daily choices 
can add a lot to your overall student debt. You probably already 
know which areas of your budget could use work, but here are 
some effective money saving tips to consider: 
1.	Suppose you pack your lunch and save $20 a month. Doesn’t 
sound like much? – that’s nearly $1,000 over a 4-year period, even 
before interest is added to your debt. That adds up when it comes 
time for repayment. Can you reduce your spending by $20? $30? 
2.	Take a full course load whenever possible and do your best to pass 
all your courses. Taking five years to finish a four year degree adds 
as much as $11,000 to your loans. That means your payments will 
be up to $113 higher every month for 9.5 years. If interest rates rise, 
it could be even more.  
3.	Earning money while in school can help you minimize the 
amount you borrow to get through school. Did you know you 
can earn up to $100 a week without any reduction in loans or 
grants? This means:
 • Any amount you earn above $100/week will reduce the 
amount you borrow and later repay.
 • You could use some of those earnings to pay down your student 
debt as you go.
	 Let’s say you work part-time while in school, and pay just $25 a 
week on your student loan. Seems doable, right? You could reduce 
your repayable student debt by a total of $3,400 plus interest.  
	 Imagine how much you could save if you brown-bagged your 
lunch AND worked part-time throughout your 4-year program!
Take charge of your debt:  
Student Finance 101
Course Syllabus
Instructor: 
Nova Scotia Student Assistance 
Office Hours: Monday to Friday, 8:30 a.m.- 4:30 p.m.
Office Location:  
2021 Brunswick Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia
Pre-requisites: 
Completed Nova Scotia Student Assistance Application
Required Readings:
I)	  Introduction to Student Finance 101 Syllabus
II) Student Assistance Terms and Conditions
Reading for Extra Credit: 
I) Financial Literacy Glossary and Budgeting Advice 
    (novascotia.ca/studentassistance) 
II)	Scholarship Opportunities (http://studentawards.com) 
Course Objectives:
In Student Finance 101, you will learn to:
• Make deliberate financial decisions that will help you reach your goals but minimize your debt
• Work effectively with the Student Assistance team to keep the loan process as easy and fast as possible
• Apply your knowledge to improve your future financial outcomes
Ultimately, you are in control of your financial outcomes – but we know that many students are new to financial planning and budgeting. 
Welcome to Student Finance 101. 
continued on reverse...
4.	Living at home while you study is much, much cheaper. If you can 
study from home you could reduce your loan repayment by $85/month 
for 9.5 years. 
5.	Investigate which scholarships and/or bursaries are available to you. 
Don’t assume that only straight ‘A’ students can get free money. The 
less you have to borrow, the lower your debt will be in the end. 
For more information about this topic, or for independent study ideas: 
Lesson 2: We are on the same team.
To practice effective team work, all team members must 
recognize their roles and responsibilities. For you to pass Student 
Finance 101, we need to work together.
Our Responsibilities
The Nova Scotia Student Assistance office works to make 
borrowing money for school as affordable as possible.  
Did you know:
• You can make payments at any time.
• Our needs-based program helps keep your final debt to  
a minimum.
• Our repayment assistance options can help while you work 
on getting your career off the ground.
Your Responsibilities
It is our job to help you access school, but we can only do this if 
you do your job - stay eligible for Student Assistance.
• Monitor your student assistance file, respond to our requests 
quickly, and know your deadlines. It is up to you to let us 
know about any changes in your income, your family’s 
income, your course load, address, banking information, etc. 
• If you are a university student, you must pass 60% of a full 
course load each year (40% for students with a permanent 
disability). All other students must successfully complete their 
program year. 
• Student Assistance is a financial contract. Make sure you 
understand all the Terms and Conditions.
Lesson 3: Apply what you’ve learned. 
If you actively monitor and manage your finances, both while you’re 
a student and after graduation, you can minimize your student loan 
debt and continue to qualify for funding. Complete the following 
assignments to ensure you are taking advantage of opportunities to 
control your total student debt.
Visit the Nova Scotia Student Assistance website: 
novascotia.ca/studentassistance/Financing your Education
School of Graduate Studies:  
novascotia.ca/studentassistance/Repayment Assistance
Follow us!   
	
facebook.com/NovaScotiaStudentAssistance    
 
@NSStudentAssist
ASSIGNMENT ONE: Brainstorm ideas to improve your budget and test some of them out. Remember, every $20 you borrow  
now deducts $20 from a future paycheque.  
ASSIGNMENT TWO: The course expectation is that you will meet all deadlines and submit all required documents  
correctly. A poor effort may lead to processing delays, cranky roomates and late rent payments. Failing to meet this  
expectation may lead to loss of future income tax refunds, ineligibility for student loan funding in the future, and a  
bad credit rating. 
Assignment THREE 
A: Explore your opportunities for scholarships, bursaries, internships, co-operative education and other ways to earn while  
you learn. 
B: At today’s interest rates, for every $1.00 you borrow today you’ll repay $1.30. That means that if you borrow $25,000 you’ll  
repay $32,500. Repay your loan as fast as you can to reduce that number. 
C: There are several income tax advantages for students both during and after leaving school. Learn about tuition tax credits  
and education amounts. Did you know that any interest you pay on student loans is tax deductible? If you do receive an  
income tax refund, consider using some of it to pay down your student loans. 
