 
MIF                                            ACCELERATED TRACK 
Introduction to Finance                          FALL 2016 
 
Syllabus 2016 - MIF Introduction to Finance                 Page 1 sur 4 
 
INTRODUCTION TO FINANCE 
Professor: Ioanid Rosu 
Assistant: Véronique Salat 
rosu@hec.fr 
salat@hec.fr 
Bldg. W2, Rm. # 27 
Bldg. W2, Rm. # 21 
Ext. 7159 
Ext. 9605 
 
PRSENTATION - PRÉSENTATION  
This is a core class that offers the basic concepts and tools necessary to understand how financial 
markets work, and how financial instruments are used for sound investment decisions.  This knowledge 
is especially important in the present environment, in the aftermath of the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009, 
and during the ongoing debt crisis in Europe.  Topics covered include the following: models of risk and 
return;  time value of money and net present value; market efficiency, anomalies, and behavioral 
finance; asset allocation and modern portfolio theory; bonds and interest rates, forwards and futures, 
options; the structure and performance of the money management industry: pension funds, mutual 
funds, hedge funds.  Effort will be made to relate the course material to current financial issues and 
problems relevant to practitioners. 
 
INTENDED LEARNING OBECTIVES - OBJECTIFS PÉDAGOGIQUES  
When you complete this course, you should be able to understand: 
• 
The basic tradeoff between risk and (expected) return, and how it applies to various types of 
financial instruments: stocks, bonds, futures, options. 
• 
The time value of money (TVM) and net present value (NPV), and their connection to the 
discount rate (cost of capital), and the risk premium of a financial asset. 
• 
The two main models of asset pricing: the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and Arbitrage 
Pricing Theory (APT).  How do we compute the cost of capital/risk premium? 
• 
Market efficiency and arbitrage.  Are markets efficient, or are they dominated by irrational 
investors?  Are prices predictable? 
• 
Diversification: how to select a portfolio of securities that maximizes return while minimizing 
risk.  How does diversification work in practice? 
• 
Financial instruments: bonds, stocks, currencies, and derivatives (futures, options, swaps).  How 
are these related to interest rates, risk hedging, speculation, or volatility? 
• 
The money management industry and its key players:  pension funds, mutual funds, and hedge 
funds.  Do they have any superior investment skills? 
 
KEY TOPICS - THÈMES PRINCIPAUX 
Part 1: Finance Fundamentals 
• 
Risk and Return 
• 
Time Value of Money and Net Present Value 
• 
Asset Pricing Models: CAPM and APT 
• 
Market Efficiency and Arbitrage 
• 
Modern Portfolio Theory and Diversification 
 
 
MIF                                            ACCELERATED TRACK 
Introduction to Finance                          FALL 2016 
 
Syllabus 2016 - MIF Introduction to Finance                 Page 2 sur 4 
 
Part 2: Applications to Financial Markets 
• 
Practical Asset Allocation 
• 
Bonds and Interest Rates 
• 
Derivatives: Futures and Options 
• 
Money Management Industry: Structure and Performance 
 
 
SCHEDULE - DÉROULÉ 
COURSE CONTENT – CONTENU 
This an approximate schedule of topics that will be covered.  You should read the corresponding material prior to the 
lecture.  "BKM" refers to the textbook of Bodie, Kane and Marcus.  Required readings are denoted by "R", optional 
readings by "O".  Reading should be only done in enough detail so that you get a general idea. 
Class 
Topic 
Readings 
Assignments 
Mon, Sep 19 
14:40-17:40 
1: The Financial System; Risk and 
Return 
BKM: chapters 1,2,3,5 (R), 18 (O) 
Case: The Historical Risk of T-Bills, 
T-Bonds and Equities in the U.S. 
 
Wed, Sep 21 
14:40-17:40 
2: Time Value of Money; Net Present 
Value 
 
 
Mon, Sep 26 
14:40-17:40 
3: Capital Asset Pricing Model; 
Arbitrage Pricing Theory 
BKM: chapters 9,10 (R), 8,13 (O) 
Case: The Cost of Capital for Apple 
and K-Mart 
Assignment #1 Due 
(beginning of class) 
Wed, Sep 28 
9:40-12:40 
4: Market Efficiency and Arbitrage - 
Part 1: Predictability, Event Studies, 
Anomalies 
BKM: chapter 11 (R) 
 
Wed, Oct 5 
14:40-17:40 
4: Market Efficiency and Arbitrage - 
Part 2: Limits of Arbitrage, Behavioral 
Finance 
 
BKM: chapter 3.8, 3.9 (R), 12 (O) 
Cases: (1) The Red Dollar versus the 
Blue Dollar; (2) The Porsche and 
Volkswagen Short Squeeze 
Assignment #2 Due 
(beginning of class) 
Midterm Exam (Topics 1-4): Fri Oct 7, 11:20-12:50 
Mon, Oct 10 
14:40-17:40 
5: Modern Portfolio Theory; Practical 
Asset Allocation 
BKM: chapters 6,7 (R), 25, 27.3 (O) 
Case: Harvard Management 
Company 
 
Wed, Oct 12 
13:00-16:00 
6: Bonds and Interest Rates 
BKM: chapters 14,15 (R), 16 (O) 
Case: Interpreting the Yield Curve 
 
Thu, Oct 13 
13:00-16:00 
7: Derivatives: Forwards and Futures 
8a: Derivatives: Options 
BKM: chapter 22 (R), 23.1-3 (O) 
Case: Hedging Gold Price Risk 
 
Mon, Oct 17 
14:40-17:40 
8b: Options: Prices and Volatility 
BKM: chapters 20 (R), 21 (O) 
Case: Speculating with IBM Options 
Assignment #3 Due 
(beginning of class) 
Wed, Oct 19 
13:00-16:00 
9: Money Management Industry 
BKM: chapters 4,26 (R), 24,27 (O) 
Case: Long-Term Capital Mgmt. 
 
Final Exam (Topics 1-9): Wed Nov 2, 10:30-12:30 
 
 
 
 
MIF                                            ACCELERATED TRACK 
Introduction to Finance                          FALL 2016 
 
Syllabus 2016 - MIF Introduction to Finance                 Page 3 sur 4 
 
TEACHING METHODS - MÉTHODES PÉDAGOGIQUES 
COURSE MATERIALS - MATÉRIEL PÉDAGOGIQUE 
We combine lectures, classroom discussions, readings, and cases, to strengthen your understanding of 
basic topics, and to sharpen your analytic and problem solving skills.  The course presents a thorough 
conceptual framework for understanding financial markets, yet at the same time offers much practical 
knowledge.  The course is therefore challenging, and requires a significant amount of work outside of 
class in order to get most out of it. 
Required Books 
Bodie, Zvi, Alex Kane, and Alan Marcus (2014). Investments. McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 10th Global Edition. 
 
Additional Textbook 
Malkiel, Burton (2015). A Random Walk Down Wall Street. Norton, 11th Edition. 
 
Required Cases, Assignments and Other Materials 
Course materials can be downloaded from the course web page, which will be announced by e-mail 
before the first week of classes.  In lectures, I will follow my lecture notes, which I will make available 
before each class. 
 
INDIVIDUAL WORK - TRAVAIL PERSONNEL  
Students will need to complete three assignments throughout the course.  The assignments are 
completed in groups, which enhances learning. 
Students will need to pass two exams, a midterm and final.  The exams are to be completed individually.  
The midterm exam is optional - see the "Grading" section below. 
 
GRADING - ÉVALUATION  
Grades are based on 3 assignments (30%), the midterm exam (20%) and the final exam (50%).  If the 
normalized midterm score is below the normalized final exam score, the midterm score will be dropped, 
and the weight will be added to the final exam (70%).  Weightings on the various components of the 
final grade are as follows:  
 
Assignments (Team) 
Midterm Exam (Individual) 
Final Exam (Individual) 
30% 
20%      or     0% 
50%      or     70% 
 
The assignments should be typed or written legibly, and submitted in hard copy at the beginning of class 
on the scheduled date.  The assignments may be discussed only with the members of your group.  Only 
one solution per group should be handed in.  No late submissions will be accepted. 
Both exams are closed-book and closed-notes, with a calculator allowed but no other electronic device 
(e.g., calculator software on a smart phone is not permitted).  You are allowed a "cheat sheet" provided 
by me, with no additional materials written on it. 
 
MIF                                            ACCELERATED TRACK 
Introduction to Finance                          FALL 2016 
 
Syllabus 2016 - MIF Introduction to Finance                 Page 4 sur 4 
 
Exam Re-grading Policy: You may request a re-grade on any exam.  Each re-grade request must be 
accompanied by a concise written explanation of the request (e-mail is preferable).  The request should 
be submitted to me within one week after the exams are distributed.  The whole exam may be re-
graded, so your score can either increase or decrease as a result.  For the re-grade request, you should 
do the following: 1. Choose at most 3 questions from the exam (e.g., 1b, 2a, 4c) for which you think that 
you deserve more points than were given by the grader; 2. Scan the part of the graded exam in which 
you answered those questions, and attach the images to the email (or to the written request); 3. Explain 
briefly why you think the questions were graded unfairly, and why you deserve to get more points; 4. 
Send the request either by e-mail or by HEC mail to my office address (see above). 
Class participation is very important.  Many of you have useful professional experience that can 
undoubtedly benefit our class discussions.  Do not hesitate to share your experience with the rest of the 
class! 
 
 
 
BIOGRAPHY - BIOGRAPHIE / PUBLICATIONS 
Ioanid Rosu has joined HEC Paris as Associate Professor in 2010. A graduate of University of 
Bucharest, he earned two PhDs from MIT, one in mathematics in 1999 and one in financial 
economics in 2004.  Between 2004 and 2010 he was Assistant Professor of Finance at the 
University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, where he taught the introductory finance 
course in the MBA and Executive MBA programs.  His work has been published in top finance 
journals such as the Journal of Finance or Review of Financial Studies.  His research focuses on 
the liquidity of financial markets and its effect on asset prices and investor decisions.  He is also 
interested in mergers and acquisitions, option pricing, and high frequency trading. 
