•
•
•
•
•
•
•
COURSE SYLLABUS
Corporate Finance 1, 7.5 credits
 
Corporate Finance 1, 7,5 högskolepoäng
 
 
Intended Learning Outcomes (ILO)
 
On completion of the course the student will be able to:
 
Knowledge and understanding
1. understand corporate finance from a cash flow perspective
2. describe the theoretical concepts of perfect market, the Law of One price and noarbitrage
opportunity
 
Skills and abilities
3. perform different valuation calculations based on cash flows
4. apply and compare various alternative ways of using and raising capital
5. use Excel to solve financial problems
 
Judgement and approach
6. judge and evaluate ethics and incentives within corporations
 
Contents
 
This course provides an introduction to the three tasks of the Financial Manager: investment
decisions, financing decisions and cash management. The purpose of the course is to present
Corporate Finance within a unifying valuation framework based on the Law of One Price and
other powerful simple ideas. The course gives also an introduction to students how to solve
financial problems with the help of a spreadsheet software.
 
Main topics covered in the lectures and seminars:
Different firm types and ownership
Concept of time value of money
Interest rates
Valuation methods
Introduction to capital budgeting
Risk and return
Short- and long-run financial planning including leasing
Course Code:
FSAK13
Confirmed by:
Council for Undergraduate and Masters
Education Oct 6, 2011
Revised by:
Council for Undergraduate and Masters
Education Nov 19, 2019
Valid From:
Jan 13, 2020
Version:
3
Education Cycle:
First-cycle level
Disciplinary
domain:
Social sciences (75%) and natural
sciences (25%)
Subject group:
FE1
Specialised in:
G1F
Main field of study:
Business Administration,
Economics
1(3)
Jönköping International Business School, Box 1026, SE-551 11 Jönköping • VISIT Gjuterigatan 5, Campus
PHONE +46 (0)36-10 10 00 • E-MAIL registrator@ju.se • www.ju.se/eng
• Corporate governance and regulation
 
Type of instruction
 
Lectures, exercises, and e-learning
 
The teaching is conducted in English.
 
Prerequisites
30 credits in Business Administration or Economics (or the equivalent).
 
Examination and grades
The course is graded A, B, C, D, E, FX or F.
 
Individual written exam (ILOs: 1-6) representing 6 credits.
Individual written assignment (ILOs: 3-4) representing 1.5 credits.
Individual Excel quiz (ILO: 5) representing 0 credits.
 
Registration of examination:
1 All parts of compulsory examination in the course must be passed with a passing grade (A-E or U/G) before a final grade can be set.
The final grade of the course is determined by the sum total of points for all parts of examination in the course (0-100 points). Grade
is set in accordance to JIBS grading policy.
 
Course evaluation
It is the responsibility of the examiner to ensure that each course is evaluated. At the outset of
the course, evaluators must be identified (elected) among the students. The course evaluation is
carried out continuously as well as at the end of the course. On the completion of the course the
course evaluators and course examiner discuss the course evaluation and possible
improvements. A summary report is created and archived. The reports are followed up by
program directors and discussed in program groups and with relevant others (depending on
issue e.g.  Associate Dean of Education, Associate Dean of faculty, Director of PhD Candidates,
Dean and Director of Studies). The next time the course runs, students should be informed of
any measures taken to improve the course based on the previous course evaluation.
 
Other information
The course Corporate Finance I replaces the course Financial Planning. Students who have not
passed the exam in Financial Planning yet are referred to take the exam in Corporate Finance I
instead (the contents of both courses overlap).
 
Academic integrity
 
JIBS students are expected to maintain a strong academic integrity. This implies to behave
Name of the Test
Value
Grading
Individual written exam1
6 credits
A/B/C/D/E/FX/F
Individual written assignment1
1.5 credits
U/G
Individual Excel quiz1
0 credits
U/G
Corporate Finance 1, 7.5 credits
2(3)
within the boundaries of academic rules and expectations relating to all types of teaching and
examination.
 
Copying someone else’s work is a particularly serious offence and can lead to disciplinary action.
When you copy someone else’s work, you are plagiarizing. You must not copy sections of work
(such as paragraphs, diagrams, tables and words) from any other person, including another
student or any other author. Cutting and pasting is a clear example of plagiarism. There is a
workshop and online resources to assist you in not plagiarizing called the Interactive Anti-
Plagiarism Guide.
 
Other forms of breaking academic integrity include (but are not limited to) adding your name to
a project you did not work on (or allowing someone to add their name), cheating on an
examination, helping other students to cheat and submitting other students work as your own,
and using non-allowed electronic equipment during an examination. All of these make you liable
to disciplinary action.
 
Course literature
 
Literature
Berk/DeMarzo, Corporate Finance, Pearson, latest edition.
Corporate Finance 1, 7.5 credits
3(3)
