 
1 
Syllabus (Winter Quarter 2020) 
© 2020 Machiavelli Chao | Unauthorized use, dissemination or duplication of this material is strictly prohibited 
 
 
 
MGMT 30A (Principles of Accounting I) 
Winter Quarter 2020 
 
CONTACT INFORMATION 
 
Machiavelli W. Chao 
TAs: Ellie Lee Hoekstra (jgoyer@uci.edu) 
E-mail: mwchao@uci.edu 
 
Hana Su (garrets@uci.edu) 
 
Matt Klinger (balonsom@uci.edu) 
Office: SB1 4313 
Office Hours: By appointment only  
 
 
 
PROFESSOR BIO 
                                                                                                      
Machiavelli W. Chao has been teaching at the Paul Merage School of Business 
since 2003, and has been honored with numerous teaching awards from his 
students, the Merage School and the university. He is UCI’s 2018 Lecturer of the 
Year, and the recipient of the 2019 Merage Excellence in Teaching awards. 
 
In the undergraduate program, he teaches financial accounting, individual, 
corporate and partnership taxation, and business law.  In the Fully-Employed 
MBA program, he teaches business law. As a full-time continuing lecturer, he often represents 
the Merage School at speaking engagements and educational programs, and has been 
interviewed by local and national newspapers regarding tax-related topics. He is the faculty 
advisor for the Accounting Association, Beta Alpha Psi (the national accounting honor fraternity) 
and Students Consulting for Non-Profit Organizations. 
 
Upon graduation from Cal State Fullerton in 1990 with a Bachelors of Arts degree, cum laude, in 
Business Administration with an emphasis in Accounting, he worked for three years at KPMG 
Peat Marwick, LLP, rising to the level of supervising senior auditor. After entering law school, he 
interned with the City Attorney of Huntington Beach, and the Orange County District Attorney, and 
externed with the Honorable Thomas F. Crosby, Justice, California Court of Appeal, Fourth 
District. Upon graduation from the University of Southern California in 1990 with his Juris 
Doctorate, Mr. Chao worked for Ernst & Young, LLP, as a senior tax consultant. Later, as an 
associate with Graham & James, LLP, he specialized in corporate and real estate transactions, 
income tax planning and appeals, and estate planning. 
 
From 1999 to current, he has been in his own private law practice in Orange County which serves 
a wide range of clients, from high-wealth individuals to partnerships, multi-national corporations 
to non-profit organizations, and local businesses to overseas clients. His firm specializes in 
counseling clients in business and real estate transactions, including the formation of business 
entities, the negotiation and implementation of business contracts and the purchase, sale and 
lease of real estate. Additionally, he focuses on planning clients’ estates to minimize the effect of 
estate and gift taxes through the implementation of estate planning strategies. Further, he advises 
and represents clients before governmental taxing authorities. 
 
2 
Syllabus (Winter Quarter 2020) 
© 2020 Machiavelli Chao | Unauthorized use, dissemination or duplication of this material is strictly prohibited 
COURSE OVERVIEW 
 
One of the most important measurements of any business organization is the money that comes 
in, and the money that goes out. And accounting is the key to keeping track of this money.  
Accounting helps establish consistent procedures to record transactions, to organize these 
transactions into common reports, and to analyze transaction patterns for informed decision-
making.  Accounting ultimately helps a business determine its profitability, health and efficiency.   
 
There are two primary goals in accounting. The first goal is to establish generally accepted 
principles on how transactions are recorded to ensure all businesses report their financial results 
consistently and fairly.  The second goal is provide tools to allow businesses to analyze financial 
results so managers can make better-informed decisions and implement strategic goals. 
 
Management 30A focuses on this first goal. The objectives of this course are to help students 
understand the basic financial statements, and to identify the business activities which are required 
to be reported within them.  This course emphasizes how information is gathered in an accounting 
system, how this information is transformed into a common language, how this information is 
recorded in a systematic manner, and how this information is presented in a way which allows 
users to understand the results and operations of the business. 
 
Additionally, another important objective of this course is to help students understand how the 
gathering and reporting of financial information is affected by the decisions made by management, 
and the changing environment of doing business. While many of the core components of financial 
accounting have remained unchanged for over a century, digital technologies have resulted in 
important innovations related to the accounting practices themselves.  Some examples are: 
 
• The popularity of accounting information systems has helped accountants efficiently record 
transactions, but has come at the cost of many accountants no longer being as familiar with 
specific accounting principles and the knowledge of how to make journal entries.  You will 
learn about generally accepted accounting principles, and the application of these principles 
to different types of businesses, ranging from sales businesses to service providers, and 
from traditional brick-and-mortar stores to e-commerce websites.  
• With the use of connected computer systems allowing just-in-time reporting of sale, the 
gathering of information on sales within a store is now near-instantaneous.  You will learn 
when revenue should be properly recognized by a business, and how this revenue is 
properly reported on the financial statements. 
• The digitization of goods, parts and supplies management systems allows alerts to be sent 
to managers as to when to re-order goods to restock shelves, supplies for employees and 
parts for manufacturing, allowing managers to take better advantage of fluctuations in 
market prices. You will learn how cost of goods sold are recorded, and the effect on the 
profitability of a business. 
• The ability to customize products, especially through e-commerce, has changed how 
businesses allocate their costs to manufactured goods.  You will learn various methods of 
inventory costing, and why different businesses use specific methods of inventory costing. 
 
The amount of information that must be correctly reported can be overwhelming, and you may 
be intimidated by all the new accounting principles and rules you will learn in our course.  
However, through our e-textbook and WileyPlus, you will have access to integrated digital tools 
to help you understand and practice key accounting concepts so that you will be able to learn 
them efficiently and effectively. 
 
3 
Syllabus (Winter Quarter 2020) 
© 2020 Machiavelli Chao | Unauthorized use, dissemination or duplication of this material is strictly prohibited 
Learning accounting is not difficult.  The key is to not just merely memorize principles.  Rather, 
the best way to learn accounting is to understand the principles by applying them repeatedly to 
many different examples. Accounting is not just about numbers; rather, it also involves a 
significant amount of reasoning and analysis.  Because each principle learned affects subsequent 
principles, it is imperative you stay focused, prepare all of the materials ahead of time, and 
complete each of the assignments. 
 
COURSE MATERIALS 
 
• 
Financial Accounting: Tools for Business Decision Making (9th edition) 
Paul D. Kimmel, Jerry J. Weygandt and Donald E. Kieso 
 
Every student must purchase access to WileyPlus, the online homework solution for our course.  
It also contains practice questions and quizzes to help you practice and understand the course 
materials.  And, most importantly, WileyPlus comes with access to an e-textbook. To register for 
WileyPlus, click on the any Adaptive Practice or WileyPlus assignment in Canvas. You will 
automatically be directed to WileyPlus where you can complete the registration process.   
 
COMMUNICATION POLICY 
 
Because this is an online course, our interactions are intended to be conducted exclusively online. 
This does not mean we are unavailable or unwilling to assist you. Rather, your primary source of 
assistance and communication will be through our weekly Zoom.us conference sessions and the 
Canvas discussion forums. 
 
Please limit your e-mails to only those matters which cannot be solved through the Canvas 
discussion forums. If you must e-mail, send it to: MaxMerage@gmail.com. For the subject line, 
please use this format: MGMT 30A: (insert your topic). Our TAs and I have joint access to all e-
mail sent to this address, and one of us can address your issue efficiently. Please consider it 
would be unreasonable to expect us to be monitoring e-mail on a 24-hour basis. As such, we 
commit to respond to your e-mail within twenty-four (24) hours. 
 
If you have any questions regarding a personal or confidential matter, you may e-mail me directly 
at mwchao@uci.edu.  
 
GRADING 
 
 
Quizzes #1 and #2 (February 1/2) 
10% 
Quizzes #3 and #4 (February 15/16) 
10% 
Quizzes #5 and #6 (February 29/March 1) 
Final Examination (March 14-17, March 16-19) 
Adaptive Practice/WileyPlus 
Zoom.us Conference Sessions 
Canvas Discussion Forums 
Group Project 
10% 
26% 
10% 
12% 
8% 
10% 
Peer Review 
4% 
 
 
 
     100% 
 
 
QUIZZES AND EXAMINATIONS (56%) 
Each set of quizzes will cover the materials discussed in the immediately prior classes—these 
quizzes are NOT cumulative—and will consist of two (2) separate quizzes. The first quiz will 
consist of multiple-option questions, while the second quiz will consist of up to two (2) short-
 
4 
Syllabus (Winter Quarter 2020) 
© 2020 Machiavelli Chao | Unauthorized use, dissemination or duplication of this material is strictly prohibited 
answer questions.  The Canvas quiz window opens at 8:00 a.m. on Saturday, and closes at 11:00 
p.m. on Sunday. The goal of these quizzes is to give you an incentive not to fall behind. 
 
At the end of our class, there will be a two-part cumulative final examination. The first part will be 
administered via Canvas, and will consist of multiple-option questions. The second part will be 
administered either via Canvas (with Examity) or at a pre-set date in-person, and will consist of 
short-answer questions. The goal of the final examination is to test your overall knowledge and 
understanding of accounting. 
 
ADAPTIVE PRACTICE/WILEYPLUS (10%) 
Accounting is impossible to learn by mere osmosis. Because the most effective way to learn is 
through practice, practice and more practice, you must complete two (2) types of assignments. 
 
First, for each chapter of our textbook, you will be assigned at least twenty (20) questions through 
Adaptive Practice. Be warned: if Adaptive Practice believes you need additional practice, you may 
be assigned additional questions.  Adaptive Practice is a self-assessment tool designed to help 
you learn the course materials while identifying your strengths and weaknesses. All Adaptive 
Practice pre-homework will be due every Monday at 11:00 p.m. Second, for each chapter of our 
textbook, you will be assigned homework on WileyPlus. All WileyPlus homework assignments will 
be due every Saturday at 11:00 p.m. 
 
If you have issues with Adaptive Practice or WileyPlus, click the “WileyPlus Support” button in the 
left-hand-side navigation bar on Canvas, where you will find a “Live Chat” option.  Before 
contacting us about any issue with Adaptive Practice or WileyPlus, you must have a WileyPlus 
ticket number which can only be obtained by first contacting WileyPlus Support. 
 
PARTICIPATION (20%) 
In addition to our expectation that you view all lecture videos in Canvas, there are two (2) 
components to your required participation in our class. First, each week, you are required to attend 
at least one (1) online Zoom.us conference session, and actively participate in this session. Active 
participation means asking questions, answering questions or contributing meaningful comments 
to the session. Our Canvas website will provide you information as to when each week’s online 
Zoom.us conference sessions will be held. 
 
Second, you must contribute posts to the Canvas discussion forums. Each discussion forum 
requires a minimum number of posts—it varies for each Canvas discussion forum—by specified 
deadlines. The goal is for our class to work together to help you learn, and to increase your 
engagement with the course materials. These posts may consist of starting a new topic, 
answering questions, or making other comments relevant to our class. While the discussion 
forums will be moderated, it is unreasonable to expect us monitor them on a 24-hour basis.  
 
GROUP PROJECT/PEER REVIEW (14%) 
Because accounting will be new to you and may be confusing, it is important for you to have a 
network of fellow students to bounce ideas off of, or to seek assistance from.  As such, you will 
be assigned into a group. Each group will complete a project which will require you to track 
financial transactions for a fictional company. Initially, this project will consist of the periodic 
posting of journal entries.  By the end of the quarter, each group must prepare a complete set of 
financial statements.   
 
Additionally, so as to provide an incentive to you to contribute to your group, each group will 
collectively complete a peer review to be completed to evaluate the performance, participation 
and contribution of each group member. 
 
5 
Syllabus (Winter Quarter 2020) 
© 2020 Machiavelli Chao | Unauthorized use, dissemination or duplication of this material is strictly prohibited 
COURSE SCHEDULE 
 
WEEK/CLASS 
TOPIC 
OTHER 
WEEK #0 
December 30 to 
January 5 
 
• Academic Honest 
and Syllabus Quizzes  
• Introductory Post in 
Discussion Forum 
WEEK #1 
January 6 to 12 
Module 1 (1A to 1E) 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Financial Statements 
Chapter 2: A Look at Financial Statements 
 
WEEK #2 
January 13 to 19 
Module 2 (2A to 2E) 
Chapter 3: The Accounting Information System 
 
WEEK #3 
January 20 to 26 
Module 3 (3A to 3D) 
Chapter 4: Accrual Accounting Concepts (Part 1) 
 
WEEK #4 
January 27 to 
February 2 
Module 4 (4A to 4C) 
Chapter 4: Accrual Accounting Concepts (Part 2) 
 
ONLINE QUIZZES 
February 1/2  
Chapters 1 through 4 
 
WEEK #5 
February 3 to 9 
Module 5 (5A to 5D) 
Chapter 5: Merchandising Operations 
 
WEEK #6 
February 10 to 16 
Module 6 (6A to 6E) 
Chapter 6: Reporting and Analyzing Inventory 
• Start Group Project 
WEEK #7 
February 17 to 23 
Module 7 (7A to 7C) 
Chapter 8: Reporting & Analyzing Receivables 
 
ONLINE QUIZZES 
February 22/23  
Chapters 5 through 8 (not including Chapter 7) 
 
WEEK #8 
February 24 to 
March 1 
Module 8 (8A to 8F) 
Chapter 9: Reporting and Analyzing Long-Lived 
Assets 
 
WEEK #9 
March 2 to 8 
Module 9 (9A to 9J) 
Chapter 10: Reporting and Analyzing Liabilities 
Chapter 11: Reporting and Analyzing Equity 
 
ONLINE QUIZZES 
March 7/8 
Chapters 9 through 11 
 
WEEK #10 
March 9 to 15 
Module 10 (10A to 10D) 
Chapter 12: Statement of Cash Flows 
• Submit Online 
Course Evaluation 
• Complete Peer 
Evaluation Survey 
ONLINE 
MULTIPLE-OPTION 
FINAL 
March 14 to 17 
Comprehensive (Everyone takes this) 
 
SHORT-ANSWER 
FINAL 
March 16 to 19 or 
March 19 
Comprehensive (Choose either:) 
• Online with Examity from March 16 to 19 
• In-class on March 19 from 1:30 p.m. to 3:30 
p.m. in SB1 Auditorium 
• Turn in Group Project 
(on Wednesday) 
 
 
 
6 
Syllabus (Winter Quarter 2020) 
© 2020 Machiavelli Chao | Unauthorized use, dissemination or duplication of this material is strictly prohibited 
GUIDELINES AND POLICIES 
 
ACADEMIC HONESTY 
UCI’s policies requiring academic honesty will be strictly applied and enforced. Academic 
dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, obtaining copies of, or information about, any prior 
quizzes or examinations given in prior classes.  This specifically includes the use of test banks.  
It also includes turning in any work product, including your work on quizzes or examinations, which 
is the not the result of your sole effort, and collaborating with any third party or resource when 
taking any quizzes or examinations.  For information on the duties imposed upon you under UCI’s 
policy on academic honesty, go to: http://senate.uci.edu/academic-integrity/. 
 
Academic dishonesty will result in an F for the course plus additional university-level disciplinary 
action. There will be no exceptions made to this policy as I have no tolerance whatsoever for 
academic dishonesty. Resist any urge you have to engage in any type of academic dishonesty.  
Do not believe you can get away with it as you will be caught, and you will be punished.   
 
CHANGES AND MODIFICATIONS 
While every effort is made to provide accurate information, I reserve the right to change this 
Syllabus, including, but not limited to assignments and dates, as necessary in my sole discretion.  
Every effort will be made to announce any changes in class.  However, changes may be made 
without prior notice.  You are encouraged to check the course website each week.  
 
PLEAS FOR RE-GRADING A QUIZ OR AN EXAM, OR FOR A HIGHER GRADE 
If you ask us to re-look at a question on a quiz or an exam—not because we made a mistake—
because you are looking for extra points to boost your final course grade, we will be happy to do 
so. But consider yourself warned: we will not just look at that one question; rather, we will re-grade 
the entire quiz or final exam. This may result in a higher quiz or exam grade. But more likely than 
not, your quiz or exam grade will fall as we realize we were too generous when we originally 
graded your quiz or exam. Make this request at your own risk!  
 
This same warning applies to any request for additional points at the end of the quarter. This will 
result in us re-examining all points which have been awarded to you during our course. 
 
EXCUSES 
You are an adult, and you are required to act like one. This means you must read this Syllabus—
I don’t write this for my own pleasure—and pay attention to and follow all instructions. Additionally, 
you are expected to not make excuses for failing to complete any requirement of this course, to 
take any quiz or examination as scheduled, or to submit any required assignment.   
 
Any request for an exception to any rule or requirement, or to postpone any scheduled due date, 
will generally not be looked upon favorably, especially if your request includes any of the following 
phrases, or similar: “I didn’t know” or “I forgot” or “I didn’t have time.”  Further, if you have an 
assignment or quiz to complete, and you wait until near the last minute to start it, then you better 
hope your Internet connection does not fail because we will not grant any extensions because 
your Internet failed unexpectedly.  Plan ahead accordingly. 
 
HELP! 
Our goal is for you not just to pass our course, but to have a thorough understanding of our subject 
matter.  Thus, if you need assistance, please follow these steps in order. First, check to see if the 
Syllabus contains the information you are looking for. Second, post your question in the Canvas 
discussion forums which should be your primary source of assistance. 
 
7 
Syllabus (Winter Quarter 2020) 
© 2020 Machiavelli Chao | Unauthorized use, dissemination or duplication of this material is strictly prohibited 
REQUESTS FOR LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION 
Before making a request for a letter of recommendation, make sure you have met these minimum 
requirements first: (1) you have completed at least two (2) courses from me, one (1) of which was 
an upper-division course; and (2) you received an A- or better in all of these courses. If you do 
not meet these minimum requirements, because of the already-high volume of requests I receive 
from former students, the chances of me agreeing to write a letter of recommendation for you will 
be very low. Of course, exceptions may be made, but they are generally few and far between. 
 
DIVERSITY AND INCLUSIVENESS POLICY 
The University of California, in accordance with applicable Federal and State law and University 
policy, does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, gender 
identity, pregnancy, physical or mental disability, medical condition (cancer related or genetic 
characteristics), ancestry, marital status, age, sexual orientation, citizenship, or service in the 
uniformed services. The University also prohibits sexual harassment. This non-discrimination 
policy covers admission, access and treatment in University programs and activities. 
 
 
