1 
 
  
 
 
 
Course Outline 
 
 
WINTER 2022 - Fundamentals of Accounting and Finance 
 
Class Time and Location:  
Section L0101: Tuesday from 3:00pm to 6:00pm in GB220 
Section L0102: Tuesday from 6:00pm to 9:00pm in BA1200 
Section L0103: Thursday from 6:00pm to 9:00pm in BA1220 
Tutorial Time & Location:  Mondays from 6:00-7:00 pm (BA1220 & GB304) & 7:00-8:00 pm 
(GB304)  
 
 
 
Instructor: Scott Douglas 
Email: scott.douglas@rotman.utoronto.ca 
Office Hours: TBA 
 
Instructor: Tony Mayadunne 
Email: tony.mayadunne@gmail.com 
Office Hours: TBA 
 
Course Description  
This course introduces a brief overview of essential concepts in accounting and 
corporate finance. The first part of the course covers the fundamentals of accounting. 
We start by exploring the basic language of accounting and the fundamental concepts 
of financial reporting. Students learn to read and analyze basic financial statements 
including the statements of financial position, comprehensive income, changes in equity, 
and cash flows. We then introduce key management accounting concepts and explore 
various methods of costing for decision-making. The second part of the course covers the 
fundamentals of corporate finance. In the second half, students will learn how to make 
financial projections and how to value complex investment opportunities. Following this, 
students will learn various techniques for controlling risk and how to determine the 
appropriate cost of capital. Finally, the course wraps up by considering issues in cash flow 
management and by providing an overview of the project valuation process as it relates 
to corporate mergers. 
 
Recommended Preparation: Engineering Economics 
 
Course Format 
In each online meeting we will present and discuss theories, concepts, analytical 
techniques and empirical findings. In addition, we will apply the concepts through 
problems as well as through analysis of cases and current events.  
 
2 
 
Statement on Equity, Diversity and Inclusion 
You belong here. The University of Toronto commits to all students, faculty and staff that 
you can learn, work and create in a welcoming, respectful and inclusive environment. In 
this class, we embrace the broadest range of people and encourage their diverse 
perspectives. This team environment is how we will innovate and improve our collective 
academic success.  
We expect each of us to take responsibility for the impact that our language, actions 
and interactions have on others. Engineering denounces discrimination, harassment and 
unwelcoming behaviour in all its forms. You have rights under the Ontario Human Rights 
Code. If you experience or witness any form of harassment or discrimination, including 
but not limited to, acts of racism, sexism, Islamophobia, anti-Semitism, homophobia, 
transphobia, ableism and ageism, please tell someone so we can intervene. Engineering 
takes these reports extremely seriously. You can talk to anyone you feel comfortable 
approaching, including your professor or TA, an academic advisor, our Assistant Dean, 
Diversity, Inclusion and Professionalism, the Engineering Equity Diversity & Inclusion Action 
Group, any staff member or a U of T Equity Office.  
You are not alone. Working together, we can all achieve our full potential. 
Required Technology 
For the first three weeks (until January 31st end of day), this course will be 
conducted entirely online. To participate fully and to complete the course 
successfully, you should ensure you have access to a computer that meets the 
University of Toronto guidelines, as well as a reliable internet connect.  
 
Required Readings 
Students can purchase the required package of readings on the University of Toronto 
Bookstore website (uoftbookstore.com). The required readings will be contained in a 
custom textbook to be published by Wiley Custom Learning Solution. This textbook will be 
titled “JRE300” and will contain 2 volumes: Accounting and Finance. Both volumes are 
also available in an e-book format.  It is recommended that the students read the 
assigned readings before each lecture.  
 
Evaluation and Grades 
 
Component 
Due Date: 
Weight 
Midterm Assessment Tues, March 1st    
35% 
Assignment (Part 1)  
Thurs, February 17th   12.5% 
Assignment (Part 2) 
Thurs, April 14th 
12.5% 
Final Assessment 
TBA 
40% 
 
Midterm Assessment 
Midterm examination will be held from 6:10-8:00pm on Tuesday, March 1st and will test 
all accounting material covered up to that point.  
 
Integrative Project  
In part I of the assignment, students will be asked to analyze financial statements of a 
3 
 
company and evaluate the company’s earnings quality. In part 2, students will build on 
their analysis in Part 1 to make financial projections, perform a project valuation, and/or 
learn which risks are worth controlling. Students are to work in groups of at least 3 and a 
maximum of 4 students per group. Students will form their own groups and a discussion 
board will be set up to assist in this process. 
 
 
You will be using a financial platform called “FactSet” to assist you in answering some of 
the assignment questions. You are required to sign up for an individual FactSet account 
(https://advantage.factset.com/academic_idrequest) 
 
Once you apply for an individual account, it may take up to four days to receive an e-
mail from FactSet, and so you should sign up as soon as possible. Please make sure that 
you choose "University of Toronto Rotman School of Management" for University Name. 
The platform is pretty straight forward, but if you want some extra help, you can go to 
“FactSet Learning” --> “Catalog”.  This module allows you to search for particular topics 
and watch videos to learn about the platform and its features. 
 
Final Assessment  
2.5 hour final examination will be held in the examination period and will test all topics 
covered in the course (with a focus on topics covered in the last half of the course).  
 
COURSE FORMAT AND EXPECTATIONS 
 
Written Assignments: 
Please note that clear, concise, and correct writing will be considered in the evaluation 
of the Integrative Project. That is, you may lose points for writing that impedes 
communication: poor organization, weak paragraph development, excessive wordiness, 
hard-to-follow sentence structure, spelling mistakes and grammatical errors. Students 
who require additional support and/or tutoring with respect to their writing skills are 
encouraged to visit the Academic Success Centre (www.asc.utoronto.ca) or one of the 
College Writing Centres (www.writing.utoronto.ca/writing-centres). These centres are 
teaching facilities – not editing services, where trained staff can assist students in 
developing their academic writing skills. There is no charge for the instruction and support. 
 
POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
 
Missed Tests and Assignments (including midterm examinations)  
Students who miss a test or assignment for reasons entirely beyond their control (e.g. 
illness) may submit a request for special consideration through the Term Work Petition 
website 
on 
the 
Engineering 
Portal 
(http://undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/petitions/term-work-petitions/). 
Provided 
that notification and documentation are provided in a timely manner, and that the 
request is subsequently approved, no academic penalty will be applied.  Students who 
do not provide appropriate or sufficient supporting documentation will be given a grade 
of 0 (zero). Further information on Term Work Petitions can be found at 
http://undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/petitions/term-work-petitions/ 
 
4 
 
There is no make-up midterm assessment in this course. If the midterm assessment is 
missed, the weight of the midterm assessment will be shifted to the final assessment 
(making the final assessment worth 75%). 
 
Accommodations 
The University of Toronto supports accommodations for students with diverse learning 
needs, which may be associated with mental health conditions, learning disabilities, 
autism spectrum, ADHD, mobility impairments, functional/fine motor impairments, 
concussion or head injury, blindness and low vision, chronic health conditions, addictions, 
deafness and hearing loss, communication disorders and/or temporary disabilities, such 
as fractures and severe sprains, or recovery from an operation. 
If you have a learning need requiring an accommodation the University of Toronto 
recommends that students register as soon as possible with Accessibility Services at 
https://studentlife.utoronto.ca/service/accessibility-services-registration-and-
documentation-requirements/. 
Phone: 416-978-8060  
Email: accessibility.services@utoronto.ca 
Mental Health 
As a university student, you may experience a range of health and/or mental health 
challenges that could result in significant barriers to achieving your personal and 
academic goals. Please note, the University of Toronto and the Faculty of Applied 
Science & Engineering offer a wide range of free and confidential services that could 
assist you during these times. As a U of T Engineering student, you have a First- Year 
Advisor, a Departmental Undergraduate Advisor or a Departmental Graduate 
Administrator who can support you by advising on personal matters that impact your 
academics. Other resources that you may find helpful are listed on the U of T 
Engineering Mental Health & Wellness webpage, and a small selection are also 
included here: 
Accessibility Services & the On-Location Advisor · Graduate Engineering Council of 
Students’ Mental Wellness Commission · Health & Wellness and the On-Location Health 
& Wellness Engineering Counsellor · Inclusion & Transition Advisor · U of T Engineering’s 
Learning Strategist and Academic Success · U of T Engineering’s Mental Health 
Programs Officer · My Student Support Program (MySSP) · Registrar’s Office · SKULE 
Mental Wellness · Scholarships & Financial Aid Office & Advisor 
If you find yourself feeling distressed and in need of more immediate support resources, 
consider reaching out to the counsellors at My Student Support Program (MySSP) or 
visiting U of T Engineering’s Urgent Support – Talk to Someone Right Now webpage. 
Academic Integrity 
Academic Integrity is a fundamental value essential to the pursuit of learning and 
scholarships at the University of Toronto. Participating honestly, respectively, responsibly, 
and fairly in this academic community ensures that the UofT degree that you earn will 
5 
 
continue to be valued and respected as a true signifier of a student's individual work and 
academic achievement. As a result, the University treats cases of academic misconduct 
very seriously. 
   
The University of Toronto’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters 
http://www.governingcouncil.utoronto.ca/policies/behaveac.htm 
outlines 
the 
behaviours that constitute academic misconduct, the process for addressing academic 
offences, and the penalties that may be imposed. You are expected to be familiar with 
the contents of this document. Potential offences include, but are not limited to: 
  
In papers and assignments: 
• 
Using someone else's ideas or words without appropriate acknowledgement. 
• 
Submitting your own work in more than one course without the permission of the 
instructor. 
• 
Making up sources or facts. 
• 
Obtaining or providing unauthorized assistance on any assignment (this includes 
collaborating with others on assignments that are supposed to be completed 
separately).   
 
On test and exams: 
• 
Using or possessing any unauthorized aid, including a cell phone. 
• 
Looking at someone else's answers 
• 
Misrepresenting your identity. 
• 
Submitting an altered test for re-grading. 
 
 
 
6 
 
Misrepresentation: 
• 
Falsifying institutional documents or grades. 
• 
Falsifying or altering any documentation required by the University, including (but 
not limited to), medical notes. 
 
All suspected cases of academic dishonesty will be investigated by the following 
procedures outlined in the Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters. If you have any 
question about what is or not is permitted in the course, please do not hesitate to contact 
the course instructor. If you have any questions about appropriate research and citation 
methods, you are expected to seek out additional information from the instructor or other 
UofT resources such as College Writing Centres or the Academic Success Centre. 
 
Email 
At times, the course instructor may decide to communicate important course information 
by email. As such, all UofT students are required to have a valid UofT email address. You 
are responsible for ensuring that your UofT email address is set up AND properly entered 
on the ROSI system. 
 
Forwarding your utoronto.ca email to a Hotmail, Gmail, Yahoo or other type of email 
account is not advisable. In some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to 
Hotmail, Gmail or Yahoo accounts are filtered as junk mail, which means that important 
messages from your course instructor may end up in your spam or junk mail folder. 
 
Quercus and the Course Page 
The online course page for this course is accessed through Quercus. To access the course 
page, go to the UofT Quercus page at https://q.utoronto.ca/ and log in using your 
UTORid and password. Once you have logged in, look for the My Courses module where 
you’ll find the link to all your course websites. If you don’t see the course listed here but 
you are properly registered for the course in ROSI, wait 48 hours. If the course does not 
appear, go to the Information Commons Help Desk in Robarts Library, 1st floor, for help. 
7 
 
Course Schedule Part 1 – Fundamentals of Accounting 
 
Week 
Lesson Content 
1 
(Jan 11/13) 
 
Introduction to Financial Reporting 
• 
Role of financial reporting in capital allocation decisions 
• 
Importance of financial reporting standards 
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #1 
 
2 
(Jan 18/20) 
 
Conceptual Framework Underlying Financial Reporting 
• 
Objectives of financial reporting & elements of financial statements 
• 
Financial statement analysis and performance measurement 
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #2, #7 
 
3 
(Jan 25/27) 
 
Analyzing Key Financial Reporting Issues (Part 1)  
• 
Accrual basis of accounting 
• 
Introduction to Statement of Cash Flows and earnings quality 
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #3, #6 
 
4 
(Feb 1/3) 
 
Analyzing Key Financial Reporting Issues (Part 2) 
• 
Identifying, analyzing and resolving financial reporting issues related 
to revenue, inventory and long-lived assets  
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #4, #5 
 
5 
(Feb 8/10) 
 
Introduction to Managerial Accounting 
• 
Cost concepts, cost behaviour and relevant costs for decision-making 
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #8, #9, #10 
 
6 
(Feb 15/17) 
 
Cash Flow Analysis 
• 
Cash conversion cycle & valuation of working capital policies  
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #11, #12 
 
Due date for assignment (Part 1) (12.5%): Thursday, Feb 17th, online submission by 4:00pm 
March 1st 
MIDTERM EXAM/ASSESSMENT (35%) – NO CLASS THIS WEEK 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Course Schedule Part 2 – Fundamentals of Finance 
 
Date 
Lesson Content 
7 
(Mar 8/10) 
 
 
Projections and Valuation of Bonds 
• 
Intro to capital markets, bond characteristics and bond valuation 
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #1, #2 
 
8 
(Mar 15/17) 
 
 
Projections and Valuation of Stocks 
• 
Intro to equity instruments, discounted cash flow models and relative 
valuation  
Table of Contents:  #3 
 
9 
(Mar 22/24) 
 
FactSet and Capital IQ 
• 
Intro to digital tools used to complete comprehensive assignment 
 
10 
(Mar 29/31) 
 
 
Project Evaluation and Real Options 
• 
Intro to capital expenditures and tools used to make capex decisions 
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #6, #10 
 
11 
(Apr 5/7) 
 
 
Cost of Capital / Capital Structure 
• 
Intro to components of cost of capital, individual component cost and 
impact of capital structure on firm value 
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #8, #9 
 
12 
(Apr 12/14) 
Hedging 
• 
Forwards, futures and options 
Table of Contents:  Ch.  #4, #5 
Due date for assignment (Part 2) (12.5%): Thursday, April 14th, online submission by 4:00pm 
Apr 19-30 
FINAL EXAM/ASSESSMENT (40%)- Date & Time TBA 
 
