 
 
 
 
 
This introductory survey course assumes no prior knowledge of business. This course has been specifically 
designed to provide students pursuing modules offered by the Faculties of Science, Health Sciences or the 
Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, an introduction to the basics of finance, accounting and 
marketing management using Ivey’s renowned case method of teaching. 
 
 
COURSE TIMETABLE 
 
The course timetable can be found on the Business 2295G OWL site. 
 
 
LEARNING OUTCOMES 
 
1. To expose the student to financial & accounting management and marketing management. 
2. To provide an understanding of how business operates and how the individual employee fits into the 
larger business organization. 
3. To develop an appreciation for the difference between the technical, quantifiable world of science and 
the uncertain socio-economic world of business.  
4. To provide the student with the skills for effective problem-solving and the opportunity to practise 
making decisions with imperfect information and under time constraints. 
5. To develop both written and oral communication skills. 
6. To provide a foundation of knowledge for increased success in future business studies (Business 2257). 
 
 
TEACHING METHODOLOGY AND EXPECTATIONS 
 
This course is taught primarily by the case method, which requires a much greater involvement of the 
student than does the traditional lecture method. Students will analyze the case individually in preparation 
for broader engagement with the class. The instructor(s) will act as a discussion leader and encourage 
students’ active learning. The very nature of the case method approach demands a high level of 
preparation, and engagement. 
 
Students are expected to be fully engaged in the entire learning process. This means devoting time and 
energy to preparation. Reasoning and discovery are critical to the successful application of the case method. 
Prior to any case discussion, engaging in discussions with (or examining notes from) others who may have 
already experienced the case class is a clear violation of conduct. To respect the intellectual property and 
integrity of materials presented, phones, cameras and any other recording devices are not to be used 
without the permission of the instructor(s). 
 
 
COURSE STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 
 
Students examine and discuss a broad range of business case issues requiring analysis and decision-making. 
While students are expected to learn basic business theory, the major benefit of the course is an 
COURSE OUTLINE – Winter 2024 
Business 2295G: Business Basics for the Sciences 
 
January 2024 
 
2 
understanding of the business environment in which decisions are made. Students will learn some of what 
is involved in good and bad judgment. Above all, they develop the capacity for forming sound decisions on 
the basis of the information available. The course continuously stresses the importance of making timely 
decisions and making them on the basis of imperfect information.   
 
• 
Financial & Accounting Management: This module provides an understanding of the financial basics 
of a business. It covers the statement of earnings and the balance sheet, the importance of cash, the 
evaluation of financial performance, and risk analysis.   
 
• 
Marketing Management: Students will gain an appreciation of marketing through analysis of corporate 
capabilities, customer characteristics, the competition, as well as political, economic, social and 
technological trends. This analysis will be used to develop promotion, price, product, and placement 
recommendations.  
 
Class delivery may switch modes as required by University and/or public health directives (i.e. in-person, 
virtual via ZOOM, etc.).  
 
 
COURSE MATERIALS 
 
Case Package: Business Basics for the Sciences 2295F/G for 2023 & 2024, Available online through 
Ivey Publishing: https://www.iveypublishing.ca/s/ivey-coursepack/a1R5c00000FvYDkEAN  
 
The course casebook and handouts are protected under copyright law and are considered mandatory 
fees by Western Senate and the Board of Governors. 
 
 
ATTENDANCE 
 
Attendance at all classes in this course is required. There is no way to “make up” for a missed class. 
Under University regulations, your instructor can determine at which point absenteeism has become 
excessive and thus can prevent you from passing the course. At the discretion of individual instructors, any 
student who misses more than 25 per cent of scheduled classes will receive a class contribution grade of 0 
out of 10 for the course. If absenteeism has exceeded 25 per cent of scheduled classes, your absences will 
be reported to the Dean’s Designate, one of the Business Foundations Program Directors, after due warning 
has been given. You may not be eligible to write the final exam/report. This UWO policy is outlined at:  
https://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/exam/attendance.pdf  
 
Allowable Absences 
Ivey recognizes that students may experience unexpected life events that can make it challenging to attend 
class. For such events, students will be offered two allowable class absences during the course (no 
documentation required). To ensure consistency for every student, the two lowest contribution classes will 
be removed in calculating final contribution grades. 
 
Extended Absences 
Students who experience an extenuating circumstance (illness, injury, or other extenuating circumstance) 
sufficiently significant to render them unable to meet academic requirements may submit a request to 
academic counselling for academic consideration. Please access the link below for specifics on 
circumstances appropriate for academic consideration and how to report them. 
https://www.registrar.uwo.ca/academics/academic_considerations/index.html  
 
 
 
 
January 2024 
 
3 
USE OF RECORDINGS 
 
Learning sessions for this course may be recorded by the instructor(s). The data captured during these 
recordings may include your image, voice recordings, chat logs and personal identifiers (name displayed 
on the screen). The recordings may be used for educational purposes related to this course, including 
evaluations. The recordings may be disclosed to other individuals under special circumstances. Please 
contact the instructor if you have any concerns related to session recordings. Participants in this course are 
not permitted to record the sessions, except where recording is an approved accommodation, or the 
participant has the prior written permission of the instructor. 
 
Technology in the Classroom 
 
In the first session(s) of each course, your professor will establish guidelines and expectations for 
technology use in their course. Given the differences in course content, delivery and application, technology 
use will vary. Sometimes you may observe differences in how your classmates engage with, or access 
technology in the classroom, from how you may access or use technology. This is because at Ivey, we 
understand that to have open and accessible classroom spaces, we may need to proactively accommodate 
students’ diverse learning needs through access to technology. Accommodations for learning differences 
support equity in our learning environments, so that students can engage, make sense of and contribute in 
our classroom spaces. For students who require access to learning accommodations related to technology 
use, please contact Western’s Accessible Education team: 
http://academicsupport.uwo.ca/accessible_education/index.html 
 
 
EVALUATION 
 
ALL COMPONENTS OF EVALUATION (TESTS, EXAMS, AND REPORTS AS NOTED BELOW) 
MUST BE COMPLETED FOR A STUDENT TO BE ELIGIBLE FOR A PASSING GRADE. THERE 
WILL BE NO RE-WEIGHTING OF COMPONENTS WITHIN THE COURSE. Late penalties will be 
applied to all submissions and will be clearly defined on the rules page of the assignments. Absolutely no extensions. 
 
Segment 
Date (eastern time) 
Weighting 
Finance & Accounting Test 
Finance & Accounting Midterm Exam 
February 5, 2024 – 3:30pm–5pm 
March 2, 2024 – 1pm–5pm  
26% or 31% with float      
30% or 35% with float 
Marketing Report 
April 8, 2024 
30% or 35% with float 
Class Contribution* 
Ongoing 
9% or 14% with float 
5% Float - added to one of the above testing points upon course completion to maximize your final grade   
*Class contribution may include case preparation, assignments, frequency and quality of discussion, 
and attendance. The 5% float will be added to reweight one of the following evaluations: the quiz, the 
midterm test, the marketing report or to class contribution based on which will give the student the 
highest final grade.  
Timed seated tests and/or midterms may be required to switch to virtual and/or report style assessments as 
required by University and/or public health directives.  
 
Business Foundations Policy for Tests and Examinations 
 
Once students have written a test or examination, they are committed to the mark earned. 
 
Where applicable, students are responsible for ensuring that all appropriate documents are uploaded to 
OWL before the test deadline or report deadline. Only documents that are submitted on OWL during the 
 
January 2024 
 
4 
test will be marked for credit. Documents may not be accepted following the testing point or report 
deadline.   
 
Students who experience an extenuating circumstance (illness, injury, or other extenuating circumstance) 
sufficiently significant to render them unable to meet academic requirements may submit a request to 
academic counselling for academic consideration. Please access the link below for specifics on 
circumstances appropriate for academic consideration and how to report them. 
https://www.registrar.uwo.ca/academics/academic_considerations/index.html 
 
Academic accommodation cannot be granted by your instructor or the Business Foundations department. 
 
Students must communicate with their instructors no later than 24 hours after the end of the period 
covered by accommodation, or immediately upon their return following a documented absence. 
 
Academic Consideration for a Medical or Non-Medical Absence 
 
Students seeking academic consideration for a medical or non-medical absence not covered by existing 
Student Accessibility Services (SAS) accommodation, will be required to provide appropriate 
documentation to their academic counsellor. Students with an approved absence (approved by Academic 
Counseling) from a course testing point must contact their instructor within 24 hours to be eligible for a 
make-up assessment. There will be one timeslot available for a make-up assessment, which may have a 
different format or length than the originally scheduled assessment. If these deadlines are missed, the 
instructor will assign a grade of zero. 
 
See https://www.registrar.uwo.ca/academics/academic_considerations/index.html for conditions 
in place for students seeking academic consideration. 
 
 
Electronic Equipment 
 
The only electronic equipment allowed during tests and examinations is a standard electronic calculator 
unless otherwise noted. 
 
 
Scholastic Offences, Plagiarism and Collusion 
 
Every student enrolled in Business 2295 is expected to comply with Ivey’s Student Code of Professional 
Conduct. A copy of this code is available on the OWL site. Each student is required to read and 
electronically sign this code on OWL. 
 
Scholastic offences are taken seriously and students are directed to read the appropriate policy, specifically, 
the definition of what constitutes a scholastic offence, at the following website:  
https://www.uwo.ca/univsec/pdf/academic_policies/appeals/scholastic_discipline_undergrad.pdf 
 
Students must write essays and assignments (this includes case exams and reports) in their own words. 
Whenever students take an idea, or a passage from another author, they must acknowledge their debt both 
by using quotation marks where appropriate and by proper referencing such as footnotes or citations. 
Plagiarism is a major academic offence (see Scholastic Offense Policy in the Western Academic Calendar 
at link above). 
 
Collusion is collaboration with another person(s) in the preparation of editing of notes, themes, reports, or 
other written work offered for credit unless such collaboration is specifically approved in advance by the 
instructor. Examples of collusion include extensive use of another’s ideas for preparing a creative 
 
January 2024 
 
5 
assignment and undue assistance in the preparation or editing of written materials. Collusion is viewed as 
being similar to plagiarism and is a major academic offence. 
 
All required papers (including case exams and reports) may be subject to submission for textual similarity 
review to the commercial plagiarism detection software under license to the University for the detection of 
plagiarism. All papers submitted for such checking will be included as source documents in the reference 
database for the purpose of detecting plagiarism of papers subsequently submitted to the system. Use of 
the service is subject to the licensing agreement, currently between The University of Western Ontario and 
Turnitin.com (http://www.turnitin.com). 
 
Students may not pay for consultation or advice in the preparation of any assigned work or testing point. 
 
In the event that students are found to have committed a scholastic offence during the preparation of 
group assignments or reports, penalties will be applied toward all group members.  
 
 
 
PROHIBITED INFORMATION 
 
Unless explicit instructions are received from your instructor to the contrary, all course preparation 
must be limited to the information provided by your instructor(s), plus your own experience and that of 
your class peers. Class contributions should be based exclusively on your preparation and discussions with 
members of your classmates, and not augmented with information obtained anywhere else. Information 
related to cases that have been obtained from sources other than your instructor in paper, electronic or verbal 
form is not permitted to be used for class contribution or study purposes. Such prohibited information 
includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
§ Handouts, including follow on ("B") cases 
§ Exam or report feedback (related to a particular case) for other students or provided in other sections or 
years. 
§ Notes, spreadsheets, internet content, etc. specific to cases (obtained before the case has been taught) 
which has been prepared by others. 
§ Company information that is not provided in the case (and that is not derived from your own experience) 
§ ChatGPT or any other AI-assistive technology 
§ Unassigned cases and/or teaching notes of any kind 
 
If it is determined that such prohibited information is used in class discussions, or for any other reason 
related to course study, such an incident will be deemed to be a violation of Ivey's Student Code of 
Professional Conduct. 
 
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES 
 
The website for the Office of the Registrar is http://www.registrar.uwo.ca/. Students may also wish to 
contact Student Development Services at http://www.sdc.uwo.ca/ or student support services at 
http://westernusc.ca/services/. Students who are in emotional/mental distress should refer to Mental 
Health@Western http://www.uwo.ca/uwocom/mentalhealth/ for a complete list of options about how to 
obtain help. 
 
A Final Welcome and Request of Our Students 
 
Ivey Business Foundations welcomes individuals of all ages, backgrounds, beliefs, ethnicities, genders, 
gender identities, gender expressions, national origins, religious affiliations, sexual orientations, ability, and 
other visible and nonvisible differences. We consider our classrooms, virtual or otherwise, to be a place 
where all students will be treated with respect. All members of this class are expected to contribute to a 
respectful, welcoming and inclusive environment for every other member of the class. 
 
January 2024 
 
6 
 
Instructor 
 
Julie Gosse 
Somerville House Room 2315L 
Telephone: 519-661-3253 
jgosse@ivey.ca 
 
Coordinator: Clarissa Reynolds, ext. 83853, creynolds@ivey.ca 
 
 
Business Foundations Program Directors 
 
Julie Gosse, Room 2315L, Somerville House; phone 519-661-3253 or email jgosse@ivey.ca. 
 
Ian Dunn, Room 2315F, Somerville House; phone 519-661-3205 or email idunn@ivey.ca. 
 
 
 
