York University
AP/Econ 4400 3.0 sections B and C
Financial Economics
Fall 2019
Time and Location. Section B: Th, 7-10pm, CB 219. Section C: Fr, 11:30am-2:20pm, SC 216.
Instructor: Adam Wilczynski, VH 1054, tel.416-736-2100, ext. 20577
Email: wilczyns at yorku dot ca;
O¢ ce Hours: Th 6-6:45pm, F 2:40-3:30pm or by appointment
TA: TBA
Textbook: Main text: Corporate Finance, McGraw Hill, 7th Canadian Edition by Ross, Wester…eld, Ja¤e,
Roberts. Alternative: Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, 6th Canadian Edition by Brealey, Myers, Marcus,
Maynes, Mitra. The two texts are close substitutes. Coverage in RWJR is more exhaustive, BM is a slightly
easier read. Another optional textbook is Corporate Finance, 3rd Canadian Edition, Pearson Canada, by
Berk, DeMarzo, Stangeland.
Prerequisites: Introductory calculus and linear algebra; basic probability theory and statistics; intermedi-
ate microeconomics
Course Description:
How do corporations raise capital? What determines prices of their securities? What is a …rm’s optimal
capital structure? The goal of the course is to familiarize students with modern thinking on these subjects.
Topics include cash ‡ow analysis under uncertainty, models of asset pricing, theories of …nancial markets
e¢ ciency, and capital.structure questions like debt versus equity.
Outline:
Part I. Introduction and Preliminaries: Math Refresher (if necessary/requested) and Basic Accounting.
(1.5 weeks)
I.1.
Role and signi…cance of …nancial markets and intermediaries.
Review of relevant mathematics:
In…nite series, convergence and limit; Probability theory: random variable, mean, variance, covariance. Sta-
tistical inference.. Reference: class notes, any texts you used in calculus, linear algebra, probability theory
and statistics classes.
I.2.
Accounting in a nutshell: balance sheet, income statement, distinction between cash ‡ow and
accounting income. References: chapters 2,3 of RWJR, chapter 3 of BM.
Part II. Valuing Cash Flow Streams, Capital Budgeting. (5 weeks)
II.1.Time value of money: the present value (PV) approach to assessing cash ‡ow streams. Present values
of annuity and perpetuity.
Applications in occupational choice, retirement saving, returns to schooling,
insurance, home mortgages. E¤ect of compounding frequency on PV. Interplay between taxation and time
value of money. References: Class lecture notes; RWJF chapters 4, 5; BM chapter 4; BDS chapter 4.
II.2. Valuing bonds and stocks; the discounted dividend model. References: Class notes; RWJR chapters
5, 6 and 26.5; BM chapters 5, 6; BDS chapters 8, 9.
II.3. The Net Present Value (NPV) approach to evaluating investment opportunities. Alternative in-
vestment rules: Average Accounting Return, Internal Rate of Return, Payback Period, Pro…tability Index.
Interplay between the rules. References: RWJR chapter 7, BM chapter 7, BDS chapter 6.
II.4. Additional topics in business project assesment: e¤ect of corporate taxes on business project value;
calculating cash ‡ows in presence of capital cost allowance; "What if" questions: sensitivity, scenario, and
break-point analysis. Value of option to extend/terminate when project cash‡ows are uncertain. References:
RWJR chapters 8, 9; BM chapters 8, 9; BDS chapter 7
Part III. Risk Pricing (4-5 weeks)
III.1. Basic measures of asset risk and how …nancial markets incorporate them in valuation. Empirical
return statistics.
III.2. Portfolio theory, Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the beta coe¢ cient approach,
III.3. Replicating portfolios, the no-arbitrage principle.
III.4. Models based on Arbitrage Pricing Theory (APT).
References: RWJR chapters 10-12, BM chapters 10-11, BDS 10-13 Material in III.3 - class notes, BDS
chapter 3.
Part IV. Cost of Capital, Market E¢ ciency
IV.1 Cost of capital as a function of …rm’s investment project, …rm’s overall risk, operational and …nancial
leverage, taxes, and agency problems. Reference: RWJR ch. 13, BM ch. 12, BDS ch. 14.
IV.2 Can investors time the market? Alternative forms of E¢ cient Markets Hypothesis. Empirical tests.
Reference: RWJR ch.14.
Grading: There will be a midterm exam (40% of …nal grade) tentatively scheduled on Thursday, October
24 for section B and on Friday, October 26 for section C. There will also be …nal exam (60%) in December.
Exam weights are non-transferable.The midterm will cover parts I and II of the syllabus. The …nal will be
comprehensive. One or two problem sets may also be distributed in class. Those will be for practice only
and will not count towards …nal grade. In marginal cases, class activity may count.
Missed Exam Policy: A student absent from writing an exam(s) will receive a mark of ’0’for the missed
exam.
Academic Honesty Policy: Conduct that violates the ethical or legal standards of the University com-
munity or of one’s program or specialization may result in serious consequences. Students should look at
the SENATE POLICY ON ACADEMIC HONESTY found in the following locations:
1. The New Students’Handbook (p. 109):
http://www.yorku.ca/laps/students/pdf/NSH09-10.pdf
2. The York University Secretariat:
http://www.yorku.ca/secretariat/policies/document.php?document=69
2
